AB  - BACKGROUND: A once-weekly, 2.4-mg dose of subcutaneous semaglutide, a       glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist, is used to treat obesity in adults, but       assessment of the drug in adolescents has been lacking. METHODS: In this       double-blind, parallel-group, randomized, placebo-controlled trial, we enrolled       adolescents (12 to <18 years of age) with obesity (a body-mass index [BMI] in the       95th percentile or higher) or with overweight (a BMI in the 85th percentile or       higher) and at least one weight-related coexisting condition. Participants were       randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive once-weekly subcutaneous semaglutide       (at a dose of 2.4 mg) or placebo for 68 weeks, plus lifestyle intervention. The       primary end point was the percentage change in BMI from baseline to week 68; the       secondary confirmatory end point was weight loss of at least 5% at week 68.       RESULTS: A total of 201 participants underwent randomization, and 180 (90%)       completed treatment. All but one of the participants had obesity. The mean change       in BMI from baseline to week 68 was -16.1% with semaglutide and 0.6% with placebo       (estimated difference, -16.7 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI],       -20.3 to -13.2; P<0.001). At week 68, a total of 95 of 131 participants (73%) in       the semaglutide group had weight loss of 5% or more, as compared with 11 of 62       participants (18%) in the placebo group (estimated odds ratio, 14.0; 95% CI, 6.3       to 31.0; P<0.001). Reductions in body weight and improvement with respect to       cardiometabolic risk factors (waist circumference and levels of glycated       hemoglobin, lipids [except high-density lipoprotein cholesterol], and alanine       aminotransferase) were greater with semaglutide than with placebo. The incidence       of gastrointestinal adverse events was greater with semaglutide than with placebo       (62% vs. 42%). Five participants (4%) in the semaglutide group and no       participants in the placebo group had cholelithiasis. Serious adverse events were       reported in 15 of 133 participants (11%) in the semaglutide group and in 6 of 67       participants (9%) in the placebo group. CONCLUSIONS: Among adolescents with       obesity, once-weekly treatment with a 2.4-mg dose of semaglutide plus lifestyle       intervention resulted in a greater reduction in BMI than lifestyle intervention       alone. (Funded by Novo Nordisk; STEP TEENS ClinicalTrials.gov number,       NCT04102189.).
AB  - Approximately 50 million children and adolescents in Latin America are affected       by the childhood obesity pandemic. We present the case of a 5-year-old Mexican       girl with obesity and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD), in whom prenatal,       lifestyle and environmental risk factors were identified. Here, we demonstrate       how childhood obesity is rooted since pregnancy and the perinatal stage, and how       the social determinants of health like unsafe outdoor conditions, lack of       infrastructure to exercise and a suboptimal physical activity curriculum in       government schools strongly influence the development and maintenance of       childhood obesity and complicate management.
AB  - Mexico has reported in 2016 a combined prevalence of obesity and overweight of       33.2% in children. The objective of this work was to make a literature review of       the factors associated with obesity in Mexican children, such as genetic factors,       feeding patterns, sedentary lifestyle and gut microbiota. We found that in       Mexican children SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) is present in genes such as       MC4R, FTO and ADRB1, associated with obesity, and that PON-1192 polymorphism       increases the risk of suffering insulin resistance. On the other hand, the       variant of the ADIPOR2 gene (rs11061971) protects Mexican children against       obesity, as well as a greater number of copies of the AMY gene was found in       children with normal weight. The evidence of the number of copies is very       important, since the current diet of the Mexican population is rich in       carbohydrates and fats, origin of a nutritional transition that includes       sedentary activities and a high consumption of sugary drinks. The consumption of       certain foods causes important changes in the gut microbiota that contribute to       the development of obesity and insulin resistance. It has been found that Mexican       children with obesity have a higher abundance of phylum Firmicutes and B.       eggerhii bacteria. Therefore, as obesity is so diverse, it is essential to       diversify the treatment in which government authorities, parents and health       authorities should get involved, as well as reinforcing nutrition and healthy       eating issues in primary education in the country in order to reverse the       prevalence and prevent the development of other pathologies in Mexican children.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Prevention of childhood obesity is an international public health       priority given the significant impact of obesity on acute and chronic diseases,       general health, development and well-being. The international evidence base for       strategies to prevent obesity is very large and is accumulating rapidly. This is       an update of a previous review. OBJECTIVES: To determine the effectiveness of a       range of interventions that include diet or physical activity components, or       both, designed to prevent obesity in children. SEARCH METHODS: We searched       CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, PsychINFO and CINAHL in June 2015. We re-ran the search       from June 2015 to January 2018 and included a search of trial registers.       SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of diet or physical       activity interventions, or combined diet and physical activity interventions, for       preventing overweight or obesity in children (0-17 years) that reported outcomes       at a minimum of 12 weeks from baseline. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors       independently extracted data, assessed risk-of-bias and evaluated overall       certainty of the evidence using GRADE. We extracted data on adiposity outcomes,       sociodemographic characteristics, adverse events, intervention process and costs.       We meta-analysed data as guided by the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews       of Interventions and presented separate meta-analyses by age group for child 0 to       5 years, 6 to 12 years, and 13 to 18 years for zBMI and BMI. MAIN RESULTS: We       included 153 RCTs, mostly from the USA or Europe. Thirteen studies were based in       upper-middle-income countries (UMIC: Brazil, Ecuador, Lebanon, Mexico, Thailand,       Turkey, US-Mexico border), and one was based in a lower middle-income country       (LMIC: Egypt). The majority (85) targeted children aged 6 to 12 years.Children       aged 0-5 years: There is moderate-certainty evidence from 16 RCTs (n = 6261) that       diet combined with physical activity interventions, compared with control,       reduced BMI (mean difference (MD) -0.07 kg/m(2), 95% confidence interval (CI)       -0.14 to -0.01), and had a similar effect (11 RCTs, n = 5536) on zBMI (MD -0.11,       95% CI -0.21 to 0.01). Neither diet (moderate-certainty evidence) nor physical       activity interventions alone (high-certainty evidence) compared with control       reduced BMI (physical activity alone: MD -0.22 kg/m(2), 95% CI -0.44 to 0.01) or       zBMI (diet alone: MD -0.14, 95% CI -0.32 to 0.04; physical activity alone: MD       0.01, 95% CI -0.10 to 0.13) in children aged 0-5 years.Children aged 6 to 12       years: There is moderate-certainty evidence from 14 RCTs (n = 16,410) that       physical activity interventions, compared with control, reduced BMI (MD -0.10       kg/m(2), 95% CI -0.14 to -0.05). However, there is moderate-certainty evidence       that they had little or no effect on zBMI (MD -0.02, 95% CI -0.06 to 0.02). There       is low-certainty evidence from 20 RCTs (n = 24,043) that diet combined with       physical activity interventions, compared with control, reduced zBMI (MD -0.05       kg/m2, 95% CI -0.10 to -0.01). There is high-certainty evidence that diet       interventions, compared with control, had little impact on zBMI (MD -0.03, 95% CI       -0.06 to 0.01) or BMI (-0.02 kg/m2, 95% CI -0.11 to 0.06).Children aged 13 to 18       years: There is very low-certainty evidence that physical activity interventions,       compared with control reduced BMI (MD -1.53 kg/m2, 95% CI -2.67 to -0.39; 4 RCTs;       n = 720); and low-certainty evidence for a reduction in zBMI (MD -0.2, 95% CI       -0.3 to -0.1; 1 RCT; n = 100). There is low-certainty evidence from eight RCTs (n       = 16,583) that diet combined with physical activity interventions, compared with       control, had no effect on BMI (MD -0.02 kg/m2, 95% CI -0.10 to 0.05); or zBMI (MD       0.01, 95% CI -0.05 to 0.07; 6 RCTs; n = 16,543). Evidence from two RCTs       (low-certainty evidence; n = 294) found no effect of diet interventions on       BMI.Direct comparisons of interventions: Two RCTs reported data directly       comparing diet with either physical activity or diet combined with physical       activity interventions for children aged 6 to 12 years and reported no       differences.Heterogeneity was apparent in the results from all three age groups,       which could not be entirely explained by setting or duration of the       interventions. Where reported, interventions did not appear to result in adverse       effects (16 RCTs) or increase health inequalities (gender: 30 RCTs; socioeconomic       status: 18 RCTs), although relatively few studies examined these       factors.Re-running the searches in January 2018 identified 315 records with       potential relevance to this review, which will be synthesised in the next update.       AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Interventions that include diet combined with physical       activity interventions can reduce the risk of obesity (zBMI and BMI) in young       children aged 0 to 5 years. There is weaker evidence from a single study that       dietary interventions may be beneficial.However, interventions that focus only on       physical activity do not appear to be effective in children of this age. In       contrast, interventions that only focus on physical activity can reduce the risk       of obesity (BMI) in children aged 6 to 12 years, and adolescents aged 13 to 18       years. In these age groups, there is no evidence that interventions that only       focus on diet are effective, and some evidence that diet combined with physical       activity interventions may be effective. Importantly, this updated review also       suggests that interventions to prevent childhood obesity do not appear to result       in adverse effects or health inequalities.The review will not be updated in its       current form. To manage the growth in RCTs of child obesity prevention       interventions, in future, this review will be split into three separate reviews       based on child age.
AB  - In the countries of Central America, South America and the Caribbean, there has       been a dramatic rise in obesity, the metabolic syndrome, hypertension and other       cardiovascular risk factors in the last few decades. Epidemiological evidence       highlights a consistent correlation between obesity and hypertension, and the       presence of obesity predisposes an individual to a greater risk of hypertension       although the mechanisms remain unclear. Obesity and hypertension are two key       drivers of the cardio-renal disease continuum, and patients with uncontrolled       cardiovascular risk in their mid-life will likely have an increased risk of       clinical cardiovascular and renal outcomes in old age. This article summarizes       the current status for the prevalence and consequences of obesity and       hypertension in Latin America, with the aim of initiating a call to action to all       stakeholders for greater implementation of primary prevention strategies,       particularly in the young.
AB  - INTRODUCCIÓN: Hasta ahora existen pocos estudios sobre las características       clínicas de la población pediátrica con neumonía por COVID-19. El objetivo de       este estudio fue analizar los datos que se asocian con el desarrollo de neumonía       en niños y adolescentes con infección por SARS-CoV-2 en México. MÉTODOS: Se llevó       a cabo un análisis secundario de la base de datos de la Dirección General de       Epidemiología del Gobierno Mexicano. Se incluyeron menores de 19 años con       infección por SARS-CoV-2 confirmada mediante la prueba de retrotranscripción       acoplada a la reacción en cadena de la polimerasa (RT-PCR). La variable       dependiente fue el diagnóstico de neumonía. Se calcularon las razones de momios       (RM) y los intervalos de confianza del 95% (IC95%). Se realizaron modelos de       regresión logística múltiple para ajustar los factores asociados a neumonía.       RESULTADOS: Se incluyeron 1443 niños con diagnóstico de COVID-19. La mediana de       edad de los participantes fue de 12 años (rango intercuartilar 25-75: 5-16). La       neumonía se presentó en 141 niños (9.8%). Los principales factores de riesgo       fueron edad < 3 años (RM: 3.5; IC95%: 2.45-5.03), diabetes u obesidad (RM: 12.6;       IC95%: 4.62-34.91) e inmunocompromiso (RM: 7.03; IC95%: 3.97-13.61).       CONCLUSIONES: Los niños con COVID-19 menores de 3 años y con comorbilidad,       especialmente diabetes u obesidad, y los inmunocomprometidos presentan mayor       riesgo de desarrollar neumonía. BACKGROUND: Currently, there are a few studies on       the clinical characteristics of the pediatric population with COVID-19 and       pneumonia. This study aimed to analyze data associated with the development of       pneumonia in children and adolescents with SARS-CoV-2 infection throughout       Mexico. METHODS: We conducted a secondary analysis of the database of the       Dirección General de Epidemiología of the Mexican Government. We included       children under the age of 19 who were confirmed with SARS-CoV-2 infection by       reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test. The dependent       variable was the diagnosis of pneumonia. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence       intervals (95% CI) were calculated. Multiple logistic regression models were       performed to adjust factors associated with pneumonia. RESULTS: A total of 1443       children with a COVID-19 diagnosis were included. The median age of the       participants was 12 years (interquartile range 25, 75: 5, 16). Pneumonia occurred       in 141 children (9.8%). The main risk factors were age < 3 years (OR, 3.5; 95%CI,       2.45-5.03); diabetes or obesity (OR, 12.6; 95%CI, 4.62-34.91); and       immunocompromise (OR, 7.03; 95%CI, 3.97-13.61). CONCLUSIONS: Children < 3 years       with COVID-19 and comorbidities, especially diabetes or obesity, and       immunocompromised patients have a higher risk of developing pneumonia.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The beneficial effects of the Mediterranean diet have been amply       proven in adults with cardiovascular risk factors. The effects of this diet have       not been extensively assessed in pediatric populations with obesity, insulin       resistance (IR) and metabolic syndrome (MetS). The aim of this study was to       assess the efficacy of the Mediterranean style diet (MSD) to decrease       cardiovascular risk factors in children and adolescents with obesity. METHODS:       Participants were randomly assigned to a MSD rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids,       fiber, flavonoids and antioxidants (60% of energy from carbohydrate, 25% from       fat, and 15% from protein, (n = 24); or a standard diet (55% of carbohydrate, 30%       from fat and 15% from protein, (n = 25), the caloric ingest was individualized.       At baseline and 16-week of intervention, the glucose, triglycerides (TG), total       cholesterol (TC), HDL-C, LDL-C were measured as well as the body composition and       anthropometric data. The diet compliance was determined by the 24-hour       recalls.Paired Student's t and Macnemar's test were used to compare effects in       biochemical, body composition, anthropometric, and dietary variables. RESULTS:       The MSD group had a significantly decrease in BMI, lean mass, fat mass, glucose,       TC, TG, HDL-C and LDL-C. (p < 0.05); the diet compliance increased consumption of       omega 9 fatty acids, zinc, vitamin E, selenium, and decreased consumption of       saturated fatty acids (p < 0.05). The standard diet group decrease in glucose       levels and frequency of glucose >100 mg/dL (p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: The MSD       improves the BMI, glucose and lipid profile in children and adolescents with       obesity and any MetS component.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to identify factors predicting       laboratory-positive coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in pediatric patients       with acute respiratory symptoms. STUDY DESIGN: We conducted a cross-sectional       analysis of a prospective cohort study. METHODS: Data from 1849 individuals were       analyzed. COVID-19 was confirmed (reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase       chain reaction) in 15.9% of patients, and factors predicting a positive test       result were evaluated through prevalence odds ratios and 95% confidence       intervals. RESULTS: Increasing age, personal history of obesity, and household       contact with a case were found to be associated, in the multiple regression       model, with increased odds of a positive test result. Young patients residing in       areas with higher population sizes, as well as those with severe respiratory       symptoms, were less likely to be laboratory confirmed. CONCLUSIONS: Early       identification and isolation of children and teenagers with suggestive symptoms       of COVID-19 is important to limit viral spread. We identified several factors       predicting the laboratory test result. Our findings are relevant from a public       health policy perspective, particularly after the restart of in-person academic       activities.
AB  - Objetivo. Cuantificar los cambios de sobrepeso y obesidad (SO+O) y determinar su       asociación con características sociodemográficas en escolares mexicanos de       primarias públicas durante 2015 y 2018. Material y métodos. Estudio transversal       comparativo. Se analizaron 6.5 millones de alumnos de 59 724 escuelas. La       información deriva del Registro Nacional de Peso y Talla (RNPT) en cuatro       periodos escolares, de 2015 a 2019, para niños de 6 a 12 años. Se estimaron       razones de momios (RM) y prevalencias ajustadas mediante regresión logística       ordinal generalizada. Resultados. Las RM fueron positivas para SO+O y para       obesidad en el sexo masculino, ámbito urbano y baja marginación (p<0.001). La       mayor prevalencia ajustada tanto para sobrepeso como para obesidad se reportó en       2016 (p<0.001). La región Sur manifestó ascensos constantes y significativos para       obesidad durante cuatro periodos. Conclusión. El RNPT permite detectar diversas       características de riesgo actual para el desarrollo de SO+O en escuelas primarias       del país.
AB  - INTRODUCTION: Childhood obesity is a public health problem characterized by early       insulin resistance (IR), inflammation, and oxidative stress. The presence of an       uninterrupted low-grade inflammatory state impairs metabolic and cardiovascular       health. The population is particularly susceptible to develop metabolic disorders       related to increased body fat. METHODS: Eighty-three adolescents were recruited       and grouped according to HOMA-IR and BMI in either with or without IR and obese       or normal-weight respectively. Anthropometric, biochemical, immunological and       hormonal variables were determined. Transverse Analytical Study. RESULTS:       Obesity, dyslipidemia, IL-6, and C-reactive protein were significantly higher in       the IR group than in the non-IR group. Obese adolescents showed increased insulin       levels, HOMA-IR, inflammatory markers, and triglycerides; while having lower       HDL-C, and adiponectin when compared to normal-weight adolescents. As expected,       obesity-related anthropometric markers positively correlated with IR and       inflammatory markers while negatively correlated with adiponectin levels.       CONCLUSIONS: Early IR, subclinical inflammation, dyslipidemia, and       hypoadiponectinemia characterize obesity in adolescents. These factors may       increase the risk of future coronary heart disease (CHD) and diabetes mellitus       development (DM) in early adulthood.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Mexico is a developing country with one of the highest youth obesity       rates worldwide; >34% of children and adolescents between 5 and 19 years of age       are overweight or obese. OBJECTIVES: The current review seeks to compile,       describe, and analyze dietary conditions, physical activity, socioeconomic       status, and cultural factors that create and exacerbate an obesogenic environment       among Mexican youth. DESIGN: A narrative review was performed using PubMed and       the Cochrane Library databases, as well as grey literature data from the Mexican       government, academics, and statistical reports from nongovernmental       organizations, included in electronic formats. RESULTS: The recent socioeconomic       and nutritional transition has resulted in reduced healthy meal options at public       schools, high rates of sedentary lifestyles among adolescents, lack of open       spaces and playgrounds, socioeconomic deprivation, false or misunderstood       sociocultural traditional beliefs, misconceptions about health, a high percentage       of overweight or obese adults, and low rates of maternal breastfeeding. Some of       the factors identified are exacerbating the obesity problem in this population.       Current evidence also shows that more policies and health programs are needed for       prevention of childhood and adolescent obesity. Mexico presents alarming obesity       levels, which need to be curtailed and urgently reversed. CONCLUSIONS: The       present narrative review presents an overview of dietary, physical activity,       societal and cultural preconceptions that are potentially modifiable       obesity-promoting factors in Mexican youth. Measures to control these factors       need to be implemented in all similar developing countries by governments, policy       makers, stakeholders, and health care professionals to tackle obesity in children       and young people.
AB  - In Mexico, higher socioeconomic status (SES) has been found to be associated with       increased risk for obesity in children. Within developed urban areas, however,       there may be increased risk among lower SES children. Students in grades 4-6 from       five public schools in Tijuana and Tecate, Mexico, were interviewed and weight,       height and waist circumference (WC) measurements were taken. Interviews consisted       of questions on food frequency, food insecurity, acculturation, physical activity       and lifestyle practices. Multivariate logistic models were used to assess risk       factors for obesity (having a body mass index [BMI] ≥95th percentile) and       abdominal obesity (a WC >90th percentile) using Stata 11.0. Five hundred and       ninety students were enrolled; 43.7% were overweight or obese, and 24.3% were       obese and 20.2% had abdominal obesity. Independent risk factors for obesity       included watching TV in English (odds ratio [OR] 1.60, 95% confidence interval       [CI] 1.06-2.41) and perceived child food insecurity (OR 1.57, 95% CI 1.05-2.36).       Decreased risk for obesity was associated with female sex (OR 0.64, 95% CI       0.43-0.96), as was regular multivitamin use (OR 0.63, 95% CI 0.42-0.94). Risk       obesity was also decreased with increased taco consumption (≥1×/week; OR 0.64,       95% CI 0.43-0.96). Independent risk factors for abdominal obesity included       playing video games ≥1×/week (OR 1.18, 95% CI 1.11-2.96) and older age group       (10-11 years, OR 2.47, 95% CI 1.29-4.73 and ≥12 years, OR 2.21, 95% CI       1.09-4.49). Increased consumption of tacos was also associated with decreased       risk for abdominal obesity (≥1×/week; OR 0.56, 95% CI 0.40-1.00). We found a       bimodal distribution for risk of obesity and abdominal obesity in school aged       children on the Mexican border with the United States. Increased risk for obesity       and abdominal obesity were associated with factors indicative of lower and higher       SES including watching TV in English, increased video game playing and perceived       food insecurity. Increased consumption of tacos (≥1×/week) was associated with       decreased risk, possibly suggesting an association with children from middle       income families. Regular multivitamin use was protective and future studies may       focus on micronutrient supplementation as a means to prevent obesity in children       or further investigate factors associated with vitamin use. Additionally, future       studies need to examine the processes of acculturation on both sides of the       US-Mexican border that contribute to increased risk for obesity in children in       relation to SES.
AB  - The increasing prevalence of childhood obesity in Latin America poses a major       public health challenge to the region. In response, many countries are       implementing obesity prevention programmes aimed at modifying known risk factors.       However, the limited scientific evidence inhibits the development and       implementation of novel, effective interventions across the region. To address       these gaps, the NIH Fogarty International Center convened a workshop of       researchers, policymakers, programme implementers and public health advocates who       are actively engaged in the region to prevent childhood obesity. Major aims of       the meeting were to define the current status of childhood obesity, identify the       scientific gaps in our understanding of the epidemic, point out the barriers and       opportunities for research and outline a plan for capacity building in the region       in the area of childhood obesity. This series of articles reflects the key       outcome of the meeting and offers an analysis of the knowledge translation needed       for evidence-based policy initiatives, a review of the research agenda and an       evaluation of research capacity in the region. The goal of the papers is to       inform the development of multidisciplinary and multisector research       collaborations, which are essential to the implementation of successful childhood       obesity prevention strategies in the region.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To analyze risk factors associated with overweight and obesity (OW+O)       among female Mexican teenagers (12 to 19 years old). MATERIALS AND METHODS:       Secondary analysis of 1 072 teenagers from the Halfway National Survey of Health       and Nutrition (Ensanut MC, 2016). Ordinal logistic regression models were used to       estimate the association between OW+O and screen time, living with adults with       OW+O, marital union, and dietary patterns, among others. RESULTS: OW+O in       adolescents was higher when living with overweighed and obese adults (OR= 2.13),       >2 hours of screen time (OR= 2.5), discretionary food consumption pattern (OR=       1.81), living in marital union (OR = 2.13), classified in the highest tertile of       household wealth index (OR= 1.86), work and doing housework (OR= 5.4).       CONCLUSIONS: The most important risk factors associated with OW+O in Mexican       teenagers were related to family factors and lifestyles.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To assess the association of maternal migration to Baja California,       body mass index (BMI) status, children's perceived food insecurity, and childhood       lifestyle behaviors with overweight (BMI > 85% ile), obesity (BMI > 95% ile) and       abdominal obesity (Waist Circumference > 90% ile). METHODS: Convenience sampling       methods were used to recruit a cross-sectional sample of 4th, 5th and 6th grade       children and their parents at Tijuana and Tecate Public Schools. Children's and       parents' weights and heights were measured. Children were considered to have       migrant parents if parents were not born in Baja California. RESULTS: One hundred       and twenty-two children and their parents were recruited. The mean age of the       children was 10.1 ± 1.0 years. Forty nine per cent of children were overweight or       obese. Children with obese parents (BMI > 30) had greater odds of being obese,       Odds Ratio (OR) 4.9 (95% Confidence Interval (CI), 1.2-19, p = 0.03). Children       with migrant parents had greater odds of being obese, OR= 3.7 (95% CI, 1.6-8.3),       p = 0.01) and of having abdominal obesity, OR = 3.2 (95% CI, 1.4-7.1, p = 0.01).       Children from migrant parents have greater risk of higher consumption of potato       chips, OR = 8.0 (95% CI, 2.1-29.1, p = 0.01). Children from non-migrant parents       had greater odds of being at risk of hunger. CONCLUSIONS: Parental obesity and       migration are associated with increased risk of obesity among Mexican children.       Children whose parents were born in Baja California have greater odds of being at       risk of hunger. Further studies should evaluate the role of migration on risk for       childhood obesity.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To characterize the nutritional status of school-aged children from an       urban public school in Mexico City, Mexico, and to assess the influence of       obesity on health status in a subgroup of these children. DESIGN: Cross-sectional       descriptive study. A nutrition screening was done for all children, including       anthropometric (ie, weight, height, and waist circumference) and blood pressure       assessment. In the subgroup of children, complementary dietary and biochemical       assessment (ie, glucose, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol,       low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglyceride, insulin, albumin, hemoglobin,       and hematocrit levels) was done. SUBJECTS: Children from an urban school in       Mexico City (N=561) aged 6 to 13 years. The representative subgroup (n=88) was       selected based on age (9 to 12 years) and weight status (ie, normal, overweight,       or obese). STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Descriptive statistics, correlations, mean       differences tests (analysis of variance, Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney U), and       chi(2) tests (categorical variables) were done with SPSS version 13 (2005, SPSS       Inc, Chicago, IL). RESULTS: In the whole school, overweight and obesity       prevalence were 27.1% and 21.4%, respectively. High systolic blood pressure was       seen in 8.4% of children and 6.2% of children had prehypertension. Higher       hypertension risk was seen in children with body mass index > or =95th percentile       and waist circumference > or =90th percentile (88 cm). Significantly higher waist       circumference, systolic blood pressure, insulin resistance indexes, and       triglyceride levels were found among the obese when compared with normal-weight       children. CONCLUSIONS: Childhood obesity prevalence is high in Mexico and it is       having an influence on children's health. It is urgent to design, implement, and       evaluate specific childhood obesity prevention programs.
AB  - Obesity is a major risk factor for non-communicable diseases (NCDs), such as       diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and cancers. The worldwide prevalence of       obesity has almost doubled between 1980 and 2008. In some regions, such as       Europe, the Eastern Mediterranean and the Americas, more than 50% of women are       overweight. Tonga, Nauru and the Cook Islands show the highest prevalence of       obesity worldwide, above 60% in men and in women. China and the United States are       the countries that experienced the largest absolute increase in the number of       overweight and obese people between 1980 and 2008, followed by Brazil and Mexico.       The regions with the largest increase in the prevalence of female obesity were       Central Latin America, Oceania and Southern Latin America. Updated data provide       evidence that the progression of the epidemic has effectively slowed for the past       ten years in several countries. In low-income countries obesity is generally more       prevalent among the better-off, while disadvantaged groups are increasingly       affected as countries grow. Many studies have shown an overall socio-economic       gradient in obesity in modern industrialized societies. Rates tend to decrease       progressively with increasing socio-economic status. Children obesity rates in       Spain are amongst the highest in the OECD. One in 3 children aged 13 to 14 are       overweight. Overweight in infants and young children is observed in the upper       middle-income countries. However, the fastest growth occurs in the group of lower       middle-income countries. There is a growing body of evidence for an inverse       association between SES and child obesity in developed countries. The prevalence       of overweight and obesity is high in all age groups in many countries, but       especially worrying in children and adolescents in developed countries and       economies in transition.
AB  - Previous studies have found increased acculturation to the US lifestyle increases       risk for obesity in Latinos. However, methodologies differ, and results in       children are inconsistent. Moreover, previous studies have not evaluated risk       factors within the heterogeneous US population. We recruited 144 self-identified       Latino school children and their mother or father in grades 4-6 in San Francisco       parochial schools and South San Francisco public schools using an information       letter distributed to all students. Children and parents had weights, heights,       demographic information, dietary patterns and lifestyle variables collected in       English or Spanish through an interview format. A high percentage of our children       were overweight [≥85th percentile body mass index (BMI)] (62.5%) and obese (≥95th       percentile BMI) (45.2%). Correspondingly parents also had a high percentage of       overweight (BMI ≥ 25 & <30) (40.8%) and obesity (BMI ≥ 30) (45.3%). Mexico was       the country of origin for 62.2% of parents, and 26.6% were from Central or South       America. In multivariate logistic analysis, speaking Spanish at home was an       independent risk factor for obesity [odds ratio (OR) 2.97, 95% confidence       interval (CI) 1.28-6.86]. Eating breakfast daily (OR 0.34, 95% CI 0.15-0.78) and       consumption of tortas (a Mexican fast food sandwich) (OR 0.45, 95% CI 0.21-1.00)       were associated with decreased risk. In stratified analysis, significant       differences in risk factors existed between Mexican origin versus Central/South       American Latino children. The processes of acculturation likely impact eating and       lifestyle practices differentially among Latino groups. Interventions should       focus on ensuring that all children eat a nutritious breakfast and take into       consideration ethnicity when working with Latino populations.
AB  - The prevalence of overweight and obesity is rapidly increasing among Latin       American children, posing challenges for current healthcare systems and       increasing the risk for a wide range of diseases. To understand the factors       contributing to childhood obesity in Latin America, this paper reviews the       current nutrition status and physical activity situation, the disparities between       and within countries and the potential challenges for ensuring adequate nutrition       and physical activity. Across the region, children face a dual burden of       undernutrition and excess weight. While efforts to address undernutrition have       made marked improvements, childhood obesity is on the rise as a result of diets       that favour energy-dense, nutrient-poor foods and the adoption of a sedentary       lifestyle. Over the last decade, changes in socioeconomic conditions,       urbanization, retail foods and public transportation have all contributed to       childhood obesity in the region. Additional research and research capacity are       needed to address this growing epidemic, particularly with respect to designing,       implementing and evaluating the impact of evidence-based obesity prevention       interventions.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Adolescence is a stage of growth with changes whose result is       adulthood. Obesity increases the risk of chronic diseases; therefore, it is       important to identify modifiable risk factors to prevent obesity in adolescents.       OBJECTIVE: To iIdentify modifiable risk factors for obesity in adolescents from a       Family Medicine Unit in the city of Puebla. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Case-control       study. The Graffar scale, the World Health Organization percentile tables, the       Krece Plus test and the Short Diet Quality Screener (sDQS) were applied. Chi       squared, odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI), and Pearson's       phi with Cramer's V were used. RESULTS: 348 adolescents participated, divided       into 2 groups. In the group of adolescents with obesity, exclusive breastfeeding       was present in 44.8%, 60.9% had at least one obese parent, 66.7% had an       inadequate diet, and 63.8% had a bad lifestyle. On the other hand, the group of       adolescents without obesity presented exclusive breastfeeding in 88.5%, 75.3% did       not have parents with obesity, 66.1% presented an adequate diet in some aspects       and 52.3% had a fair to good lifestyle. CONCLUSION: The absence of exclusive       breastfeeding in the first 6 months of life, parental obesity, poor physical       activity, and inadequate diets were associated with the presence of obesity in       adolescents.
AB  - Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) affects almost a quarter of the world's       population and is the most common cause of chronic liver disease in children and       adolescents. The recent proposal to replace the terminology of NAFLD with       metabolic-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) aims to reflect the       pathophysiology and risk factors for this disease. Importantly, the risk factors       for MAFLD may be prenatal, such as genetic factors, or postnatal, such as obesity       and insulin resistance. MAFLD is increasingly recognized in children and       adolescents. Early diagnosis and identification of high-risk individuals with       type 2 diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome is important. The diagnosis and       management of MAFLD in children and adolescents should follow international       clinical guidelines, such as those from the American Diabetes Association (ADA)       and the International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD).       Current guidelines recommend lifestyle and dietary modifications, exercise,       screening, individualized patient assessment, and multidisciplinary patient       management. This review assesses the revised terminology and discusses the       epidemiology, risk factors, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and prevention of MAFLD       in children and adolescents worldwide and in Mexico, and also considers the       implications for public health.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Adipokines and the myokine irisin, involved in mechanisms associated       with obesity and metabolic syndrome (MS), are understudied in the pediatric       population. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between irisin, and       leptin, resistin, adiponectin, adipsin, anthropometric and cardiovascular risk       factors in Mexican children. METHODS: A cross-sample of 126 Mexican children aged       6-12 years old were classified as normal weight (n = 46), obese (n = 40), and MS       (n = 40) according to CDC's and Cook's age-modified criteria for obesity and MS.       Anthropometric parameters and blood pressure were determined and percentiles       calculated for age and gender. Irisin, leptin, adiponectin, adipsin, resistin,       triglycerides, glucose, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-c) levels, and       physical activity were determined. Statistical tests for differences between       groups, correlation, and multiple regression analyses were performed. RESULTS:       Irisin plasma levels were significantly lower in the obese (6.08 [4.68-6.65]) and       MS groups (6.46 [5.74-7.02]) compared with the normal-weight group (8.05       [7.24-8.94]) (p < 0.001). Irisin levels were not influenced by age or gender, but       significant dispersion was observed in obese girls (95% CI median [2.29-6.30]).       Leptin, resistin, and adipsin levels were significantly increased in the obese       and MS groups. Lean-fat ratio was significantly higher in the NW group. Irisin       correlated negatively with leptin (- 0.310), resistin (- 0.389), adipsin       (- 0.362), BMI% (-0.472), WC% (- 0.453), BMI z-score (- 0.496), fat free mass       (- 0.257), fat percentage (- 0.532), fat mass (- 0.515), triglycerides (- 0.291),       the number of cardiometabolic risk factors (- 0.443) (p < 0.001); positively with       lean-fat ratio (0.489) and HDL-c (0.328) (p < 0.001) and none with physical       activity (p < 0.001). Following stepwise multiple linear regression analysis, the       lean-fat ratio was the only determinant of irisin levels (B = 1.168, p < 0.001).       CONCLUSIONS: Lean-fat ratio, more than the absolute amount of muscle or fat mass,       as well as potential myokine-adipokine cross-talk mechanisms may explain the       lower irisin levels in children with obesity and MS, through blunted compensatory       responses interfering with tissue-dependent irisin secretion, contributing to a       continuous deleterious effect cycle.
AB  - Rapidly changing dietary practices accompanied by an increasingly sedentary       lifestyle predispose to nutrition-related non-communicable diseases, including       childhood obesity. Over the last 5 y, reports from several developing countries       indicate prevalence rates of obesity (inclusive of overweight) >15 % in children       and adolescents aged 5-19 y; Mexico 41.8 %, Brazil 22.1 %, India 22.0 % and       Argentina 19.3 %. Moreover, secular trends also indicate an alarming increase in       obesity in developing countries; in Brazil from 4.1 % to 13.9 % between 1974 and       1997; in China from 6.4 % to 7.7 % between 1991 and 1997; and in India from 4.9 %       to 6.6 % between 2003-04 to 2005-06. Other contributory factors to childhood       obesity include: high socio-economic status, residence in metropolitan cities and       female gender. Childhood obesity tracks into adulthood, thus increasing the risk       for conditions like the metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM),       polycystic ovarian syndrome, hypertension, dyslipidemia and coronary artery       disease later in life. Interestingly, prevalence of the metabolic syndrome was       35.2 % among overweight Chinese adolescents. Presence of central obesity (high       waist-to-hip circumference ratio) along with hypertriglyceridemia and family       history of T2DM increase the odds of T2DM by 112.1 in young Asian Indians (< 40       y). Therapeutic lifestyle changes and maintenance of regular physical activity       are most important strategies for preventing childhood obesity. Effective health       awareness educational programs for children should be immediately initiated in       developing countries, following the successful model program in India (project       'MARG').
AB  - In Mexico, 3 of 10 children are overweight. Fructose intake and relative       abundance (RA) of Lactobacillus reuteri (L. reuteri) in the intestinal microbiota       are associated with obesity and diabetes in adults, but studies in children are       limited. This study evaluates the association between fructose intake and L.       reuteri RA with adiposity and cardiometabolic risk markers in Mexican children       dietary information, microbiota profiles, adiposity indicators (Body Mass Index,       BMI and Waste Circumference, WC), and cardiometabolic markers were analyzed in       1087 children aged 6-12 years. Linear regression and path analysis models were       used. High-tertile fructose intake and L. reuteri RA were positively associated       with BMI (β(Tertil 3 vs. Tertil 1) = 0.24 (95% CI, 0.04; 0.44) and β(T3 vs. T1) =       0.52 (95% CI, 0.32; 0.72)) and WC (β(T3 vs. T1) = 2.40 (95% CI, 0.93; 3.83) and       β(T3 vs. T1) = 3.40 (95% CI, 1.95; 4.90)), respectively. Also, these factors       mediated by adiposity were positively correlated with high triglycerides and       insulin concentrations and HOMA-IR (p ≤ 0.03) and negatively associated with       HDL-C concentration (p < 0.01). High-tertile fructose intake and L. reuteri RA       were directly associated with adiposity and indirectly associated though       adiposity with metabolic disorders in children. In conclusion, fructose intake       and L. reuteri RA were directly associated with adiposity and indirectly       associated with metabolic disorders in children, mediated by adiposity.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Childhood obesity is a public health concern that disproportionately       affects populations from low socioeconomic status (SES) and minority groups.       Evaluation of social and health risk factors of preschool children living along       the Texas-Mexico border provides feedback to design health interventions.       METHODS: South Texas Early Prevention Study-PreK (STEPS-PreK) is a cluster       randomized trial designed to assess the effect of the Bienestar coordinated       school health program on children's health outcomes. Family characteristics,       dietary intake, fitness, and anthropometric data were collected from 1277       preschool students enrolled in 28 preschools. RESULTS: The response rate was 67%.       Overall, 57% of families lived in poverty. The mean age of students was       4.7 years, 95% were Hispanic, and 51% were male. The average serving of fruits       and vegetables per day were 1 and 1/3, respectively. Of these, students consumed       39.7% of fruits and 18.9% of vegetables. Obesity prevalence for boys was 19.2%       and for girls 16.8%. Nearly one-half reported some form of food insecurity.       CONCLUSIONS: Children living in low-income areas are affected by high levels of       social and health risk factors. It is these families who should be targeted with       early-age and culturally appropriate health programs.
AB  - Increases in the prevalence of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), particularly       cardiometabolic diseases such as cardiovascular disease, stroke and diabetes, and       their major risk factors have not been uniform across settings: for example,       cardiovascular disease mortality has declined over recent decades in high-income       countries but increased in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). The factors       contributing to this rise are varied and are influenced by environmental, social,       political and commercial determinants of health, among other factors. This Review       focuses on understanding the rise of cardiometabolic diseases in LMICs, with       particular emphasis on obesity and its drivers, together with broader       environmental and macro determinants of health, as well as LMIC-based responses       to counteract cardiometabolic diseases.
AB  - OBJECTIVES: This study examines links between early life circumstances and adult       socioeconomic status and obesity and hypertension in the adult Mexican       population. METHOD: We use data from the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS)       collected in 2002 for people aged 20 or older (N = 14,280). RESULTS: We found       that men with low education and women with more education have significantly       lower obesity. Women with higher education also have significantly less       hypertension. Obesity triples the likelihood of hypertension among both men and       women. Better childhood experiences are associated with less hypertension among       women, but more hypertension among men in rural areas. DISCUSSION: Recent changes       in income, nutrition, and infection in Mexico may be responsible for the observed       high prevalence of overweight and obesity and the extremely high odds of       hypertension among obese young adults.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: Obesity is clearly associated to kidney disease in adult population;       however, there is scarce evidence in children and adolescents. The aim was to       compare frequency of renal damage according to the presence of overweight-obesity       in children and adolescents, as well as to compare nutritional and biochemical       risk factors, according to the presence of kidney alterations. METHODS:       Cross-sectional study; 172 children and adolescents, 6-16 years old, without       malnutrition, diabetes mellitus, hypertension and independent comorbid conditions       associated to obesity or kidney disease, as well as transitory causes of       microalbuminuria (MA) from a Primary Health-Care Unit were included. Clinical,       biochemical, anthropometric and dietetic evaluations were measured in all       subjects; subsequently they were classified as normal weight, overweight and       obesity groups according to sex- and age-adjusted body mass index (BMI).       Glomerular filtration rate (GFR, estimated by Schwartz equation) and albuminuria       (albumin/creatinine ratio) were determined. Presence of kidney alterations was       measured as decreased GFR (<90 mL/min/1.73m(2)), hyperfiltration       (>170 mL/min/1.73m(2)) and MA (30-300 mg/g). RESULTS: Compared with controls,       subjects with overweight-obesity had significantly (P<.05) abdominal obesity (0       vs 69%), hypertension (19 vs 26%), hypertriglyceridemia (11 vs 47%), high       low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (2 vs 8%) and low high-density lipoprotein       cholesterol (HDL-cholesterol; 2 vs 28%), hyperuricemia (11 vs 28%) and       hyperinsulinemia (8 vs 70%). Hyperfiltration and MA were present in 5 and 4       subjects with overweight/obesity, respectively, whereas decreased GFR was present       in only 1 subject with obesity. Normal weight subjects had no kidney alterations.       In multivariate analysis, kidney alterations were significantly predicted by       higher BMI and lower HDL-cholesterol. CONCLUSIONS: Kidney alterations were       observed only in subjects with overweight (3.6%) and obesity (9.9%), who       additionally, displayed cardiometabolic and kidney disease risk factors more       frequently than normal weight subjects.
AB  - The aim of this study was to determine the risk factors of childhood obesity       among infants and toddlers from low-income families from three cities in Mexico.       This is a cross-sectional study of mothers and their infants and toddlers       attending a vaccination centre at three primary care clinics in Tijuana, Tuxtla,       and Reynosa. Anthropometric measurements of the mothers and children were       conducted at the clinic and a questionnaire was administered to the mother.       Eight-hundred and ten mothers and their 5 to 24 months old infants participated       in the study. Average age for the mothers was 24 (21-28) years, and 57% of them       were either overweight or obese. The children's average age was 12.7 (5-24)       months. Overall overweight prevalence in this sample was 11% and obesity 8%,       these increased with age, from 3% for overweight and 6 % for obesity before 6       months, to 13 and 10% between 12 to 24 months respectively. Thirty-five percent       of infants were breastfed>or=6 month and 92% were introduced to other solid foods       before 6 months. Introduction of high-fat content snacks (HFS) and carbonated and       non-carbonated sweetened (CSD) drinks starts before 6 months and more than sixty       percent of the children between 12 to 24 months of age were eating HFS and CSD       sweetened drinks at least once a week. Consumption of snacks and CSD sweetened       drinks (>or=1 week) was associated with being overweight and obese (crude), OR,       1.82; 95% CI=1.24-2.65 (p=0.002). These results suggest that preventive programs       should be initiated during pregnancy and continued.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC)       has promoted surveys in asthma and allergic diseases using standardized       methodologies including validated questionnaires. Many items in the       questionnaires have also been implied in the overweight and obesity etiology.       OBJECTIVE: To describe the factors associated with obesity in subjects of 6-7       years and 13-14 years in the ISAAC survey in Mexico City. MATERIAL AND METHODS:       Data were obtained from questionnaires of children participating in a phase 3b       ISAAC survey. Logistic regression was used to determine the obesity risks       factors. RESULTS: The factors related to obesity were weekly consumption of meat       (+, positive relationship), vegetables, pasta, rice (+) and quartiles of birth       weight (+) in boys of 6-7 years. Having suffered eczema at any time, weekly       consumption of fruit, pasta, butter, nuts, potato (+), fast food (+), daily TV       viewing (+) in girls of 6-7years. Having suffered eczema at any time, weekly       consumption of pasta (+), butter, potato, weekly physical exercise in boys of       13-14 years; weekly consumption of pasta, margarine, milk, fast food (+),       currently smoking in girls of 13-14 years. CONCLUSIONS: There were not common       factor patterns for the different groups, birth weight, fast food, TV viewing and       lack of exercise have been previously related to pediatric obesity. Asthma was       not associated with a higher risk of obesity but medical history of eczema was       associated with lower risk of obesity in the 6-7 years girls, and 13-14 years       boys. The present study provides the bases for future epidemiological studies and       gives some clues on possible public health actions.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Childhood adversities are prevalent worldwide and might affect adult       cardiovascular health. However, in middle-income countries such as Mexico,       research on the impact of childhood adversities on cardiovascular disease (CVD)       in adulthood is lacking. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence of adverse       childhood experiences (ACEs) and their association with risk factors for CVD in       adult Mexican women. PARTICIPANTS AND SETTING: The study population comprised       9853 women from the Mexican Teachers´ Cohort. METHODS: Participants responded to       an online questionnaire including a 10-item instrument on ACEs and questions on       CVD risk factors, between 2014 and 2017. Multivariate logistic regression models       were used to evaluate the association between ACEs and adult behavioral and       medical CVD risk factors. RESULTS: About 61% of participants reported at least       one ACE and 14% reported four or more. After multivariable adjustment, women who       reported ≥4 ACEs had 58% (95%CI 1.37, 1.81) higher odds of having ever smoked and       17% (95%CI 0.69, 0.99) lower odds of being physically active, compared with women       who reported no ACEs. Women who reported ≥4 ACEs also had higher odds of       hypertension (OR = 1.19; 95%CI 1.00, 1.43), diabetes (OR = 1.49; 95%CI 1.13,       1.96), high cholesterol (OR = 1.49; 95%CI 1.26, 1.75), and obesity (OR = 1.37;       95%CI 1.19, 1.57). In addition, individual ACE components were independently       associated with several CVD risk factors. CONCLUSION: ACEs are common and       associated with CVD risk factors in adult Mexican women.
AB  - BACKGROUND: During the Covid-19 pandemic, children and adolescents faced poverty,       potentially dying from preventable causes, or missing out essential vaccines. The       aim of this study was to assess potential environmental and individual factors       associated to COVID-19 mortality in children and adolescents in Mexico. METHODS:       This cross-sectional study analysed the official data of 131,001 children under       10 years of age and adolescents between 10 and 19 years of age with COVID-19       disease, in Mexico. Participants were diagnosticated between March 2020 and June       13, 2021. The environmental variables such as malnutrition, vaccination coverage       and social lag index were evaluated at the state level. Multilevel models were       fitted to evaluate the association between environmental and individual factors       and COVID-19 mortality. FINDINGS: A total of 773 (0.6%) children and adolescents       died due to COVID-19. Younger age (OR = 0.878, 95%CI: 0.869-0.888), diabetes       (OR = 3.898, 95%CI: 2.596-5.851), immunosuppression (OR = 5.410, 95%CI:       4.088-7.158), obesity (OR = 1.876, 95%CI: 1.397-2.521), hypertension (OR = 1.906,       95%CI: 1.239-2.932), cardiovascular disease (OR = 2.288, 95%CI: 1.482-3.531), and       chronic kidney disease (OR = 13.250, 95%CI: 9.066-19.350) were associated with       mortality. COVID-19 mortality was directly associated with social lag index and       malnutrition (OR(very high) = 2.939, 95%CI: 1.111-7.775, and OR = 1.390, 95%CI:       1.073-1.802, respectively), and inversely associated with population density       (OR = 0.374, 95%CI: 0.204-0.688). Finally, children and adolescents living in       areas with a higher percentage of people with incomplete education (OR = 1.045,       95%CI: 1.011-1.081), of children of school age of 6-14 years who do not attend       school (OR = 1.266, 95%CI: 1.032-1.554), and of illiterate population aged 15 and       over (OR = 1.086, 95%CI: 0.999-1.179) were associated with a higher risk of       COVID-19 mortality. INTERPRETATION: Malnutrition, social lag index and population       density are key factors to understand COVID-19 mortality in children and       adolescents. Also, age and pre-existing comorbidities were also associated with       worse COVID-19 prognosis. FUNDING: No funding was secured for this study.
AB  - Long-term childhood cancer survivors are at great risk of developing late adverse       effects after treatment, such as, reduced growth, obesity, decreased fertility,       high blood pressure, cardiovascular diseases, impaired glucose, another form of       cancer, among others organ dysfunctions, some of them are part of the metabolic       syndrome. Metabolic syndrome and cancer connection is still not entirely       understood, but there are some notions about it. Metabolic alterations produced       during childhood cancer are more likely determined by treatments like       radiotherapy, chemotherapy, glucocorticoids therapy, and surgery. Cancer       treatment is associated to vascular alterations, hormone deficiencies, changes in       insulin sensitivity, lipid metabolism, and inflammatory mediators. Obesity has       been considered a crucial component in metabolic syndrome; obesity risk factors       during childhood cancer include cranial radiation, female gender, and exposure to       glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone. In addition, local radiotherapy or surgery       may cause endocrine deficiencies, depends on the directly damage of endocrine       organs. Patients who received some types of cancer treatment should be evaluated       periodically to early diagnostic metabolic disorders associated to antineoplastic       therapy.
AB  - Childhood obesity and metabolic disorders are of concern and are public health       problems globally. Environmental endocrine disruptors, including phthalates, are       well known as "obesogens" and "metabolic disruptors". Several studies have       investigated the relationships between prenatal phthalate exposure and childhood       obesity with inconsistent conclusions. Given the child growth trajectory/pattern       as a possible early marker of metabolic disorders, we aimed to assess the effect       of prenatal phthalate exposure on offspring growth trajectory. A systematic       literature search was conducted using MEDLINE (accessed through PubMed), Web of       Science, and CNKI (Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure) until July 2021. We       evaluated the risk of bias for adherence to the prespecified criteria. Fourteen       eligible articles were finally included in this systematic review according to       the defined PECOS statement. The risk of bias of the included studies was "low"       or "probably low", and few were "probably high" and "high". These studies were       mostly carried out in the United States (N = 6); others were conducted in China       (N = 2), Mexico (N = 2), France (N = 1), Spain (N = 1), Greece (N = 1), and       Australia (N = 1) and published from 2015 to 2021. The combined subjects of the       14 studies were 10,396 mother-child pairs. Except for 3 studies not reporting the       sex ratio, at least 4001 boys and 3366 girls were included. For the association       of prenatal phthalate exposure with an absolute adiposity marker (at a specific       visit timepoint), only a few studies were using the same obesity marker as the       outcome endpoint and using the same statistical method to explore their       associations. However, MEP appeared to be positively associated with several       obesity markers, such as the absolute BMI z score, weight-for-age z score, waist       circumference, and overweight status. For the association of prenatal phthalate       exposure with a repeated measurement of the adiposity marker over the age range,       neither associations of adiposity markers with a specific phthalate metabolite       nor relationships of a specific adiposity marker with prenatal phthalate exposure       were of a consistent result. All four articles reported that phthalate metabolite       exposure during pregnancy was associated with children's growth trajectory. Three       suggested a sex-specific association between prenatal phthalate exposure and       obesity trajectory. In conclusion, the current articles did not show any       relationship between prenatal phthalate exposure and children's age-specific       outcomes, except for positive associations of prenatal MEP exposure with absolute       adiposity markers. However, epidemiological data supported a weak relationship       between prenatal phthalate exposure and children's obesity trajectory in a       sex-specific manner.
AB  - Childhood obesity causes not only medical and psychosocial problems, it also       reduces the life expectancy of the adults that they will become. On a large       scale, obese adults adversely affect labor markets and the gross domestic product       of countries. Monitoring the growth charts of children helps to maintain their       body weight within healthy parameters according to the World Health Organization.       Modern technologies allow the use of telehealth to carry out weight control       programs and monitoring to verify children's compliance with the daily       recommendations for risk factors that can be promoters of obesity, such as       insufficient physical activity and insufficient sleep hours. In this work, we       propose a secure remote monitoring and supervision scheme of physical activity       and sleep hours for the children based on telehealth, multi-user networks,       chaotic encryption, and spread spectrum, which, to our knowledge, is the first       attempt to consider this service for safe pediatric telemedicine. In experimental       results, we adapted a recent encryption algorithm in the literature for the       proposed monitoring scheme using the assessment of childhood obesity as an       application case in a multi-user network to securely send and receive fictitious       parameters on childhood obesity of five users through the Internet by using just       one communication channel. The results show that all the monitored parameters can       be transmitted securely, achieving high sensitivity against secret key, enough       secret key space, high resistance against noise interference, and 4.99 Mb/sec in       computational simulations. The proposed scheme can be used to monitor childhood       obesity in secure telehealth application.
AB  - Background: This study is a longitudinal analysis of how the transition of a       mother, father, or any other family member to obesity affects the likelihood of       children 5-12 years of age becoming adolescents with overweight or obesity during       the 7-10-year period between 2002 and the period from 2009 to 2012 in Mexico.       Methods: The study used two rounds of the Mexican Family Life Survey, a       multipurpose random national survey that collected information on 8441       households, including 38,233 individuals in 2002 and successfully followed up       with 3202 children until the period from 2009 to 2012. We used logistic       regressions to calculate how family characteristics related to the evolution of       body mass indexes among children, controlling for individual, family       weight-related characteristics, and the socioeconomic level of the family.       Results: The transition of any family member toward obesity is more relevant in       determining the transition to obesity among normal-weight children than       socioeconomic level of the family and individual characteristics, such as sex,       schooling, and occupation. Conclusions: The transition of any family member       toward obesity is associated with the transition to obesity among normal-weight       children. A family-based approach to obesity prevention has yet to be       incorporated into national policies.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To describe a third-degree polynomial function (hysteresis) of the       effect size of age, obesity, and insulin sensitivity over the carotid       intima-media thickness (c-IMT), in the pediatric and adult groups. METHODS: A       quasi-experimental study with fixed factor analysis of age (children aged 8-12       years, n = 73; adults aged 21-45 years, n = 82) and obesity (yes, n = 76; no, n =       79) was conducted to analyze the effect on the c-IMT and Matsuda insulin       sensitivity index values. This quasi-experimental design was analyzed with robust       regression modeling. RESULTS: The additive effect of obesity, independent of age,       was evident in the case of the c-IMT values. There was no interaction effect, but       a significant difference between participants with normal weight and those with       obesity was found (P < .0001). The difference between adults and children was       also significant, but the effect size was smaller. A model was created based on       age, Tanner stage, and obesity using the c-IMT and Matsuda insulin sensitivity       index values. A linear function fit as R(2), and the cubic function estimated       parameters like a polynomial model. CONCLUSION: This practical study design       showed that children with obesity displayed the same levels of carotid       intima-media abnormalities as adults with obesity. The polynomial shape of the       model suggests potentially poor outcomes that resemble the hysteresis process and       may predict chronic cardiometabolic events during early adulthood.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of Leisure-time physical activity (LTPA) on       cardiometabolic risk by nutritional status in Mexican children and adolescents.       METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study conducted with 1,309 participants aged       between 5 and 17 years. Nutritional status was classified according to the BMI       Z-score by age and gender. A previously validated questionnaire was used to       evaluate LTPA; a cardiometabolic risk score was calculated. Multiple linear       regression analysis was performed to assess the effect of LTPA on cardiometabolic       risk. RESULTS: After adjusting for risk factors, mild LTPA were positively       associated with cardiometabolic risk score (βMildvsIntenseLTPA: 0.68; 95% CI:       0.18 to 1.18; pfortrend = 0.007). This association became stronger when estimated       for overweight (β MildvsIntenseLTPA: 1.24; 95% CI: 0.24 to 2.24; pfortrend =       0.015) and obese participants (β MildvsIntenseLTPA: 1.02; 95% CI: 0.07 to 1.97;       pfortrend= 0.045). CONCLUSION: Mild LTPA was positively associated with       cardiometabolic risk in overweight and obese children and adolescents. Given the       emerging childhood obesity epidemic in Mexico, these results may be useful in the       design of strategies and programs to increase physical activity levels in order       to achieve better health.
AB  - BACKGROUND: It has been pointed out that ghrelin and obestatin could have an       impact on the genesis of obesity, since they estimulate and inhibit apetite and,       therefore, food consumption. OBJECTIVE: To compare the metabolic profile, lipid       profile and the concentrations of ghrelin and obestatin in children with normal       weight or obesity. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Cross-sectional design with 97 normal       weight or obese children, 6 to 18 years of age, who did not present systemic       diseases. The serum concentrations of glucose, insulin, total cholesterol,       triglycerides, high (HDL), low (LDL) and very low density (VLDL) lipoproteins,       aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), ghrelin and       obestatin were determined. Descriptive statistics were performed. Student's t       test was used to compare groups, and correlation coefficients of ghrelin and       obestatin values with biochemical and anthropometric variables. A p value of ≤       0.05 was significant. RESULTS: 55 children with normal weight and 42 with obesity       were included; mean age was 10.7 years. Triglycerides, LDL, VLDL, ALT and insulin       were higher, and HDL lower in obese children (p < 0.05). Ghrelin values were       higher in normal weight children (p < 0.05), and there was no difference in       obestatin values. CONCLUSIONS: The lower concentration of ghrelin in obese       children may indicate a negative feedback to regulate energy consumption.       Children and adolescents with obesity show metabolic and lipid profile       alterations that place them at risk of early development of cardiovascular risk       factors.
AB  - BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The increase in overweight and obese children and       adolescents may be linked to increased rates of dyslipidaemia. The aim was to       assess the prevalence of dyslipidaemia and associated risk factors among the       Balearic Islands' adolescent population. SUBJECTS/METHODS: A random sample       (n=362, 143 boys and 219 girls, aged 12-17 years) was interviewed,       anthropometrically measured and fasting blood samples taken. According to the       2011 Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk       Reduction in Children and Adolescents, dyslipidaemia was defined as the presence       of one or more of the following levels (mg/dl): total cholesterol (TChol)⩾200,       low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-chol)⩾130, non-high-density lipoprotein       cholesterol (non-HDL-chol)⩾145, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol       (HDL-chol)<40 and tryglicerides (TG)⩾130. RESULTS: The overall prevalence of       borderline-high+high TChol, LDL-chol, non-HDL-chol and TG was 24.3, 10.4, 13.3       and 14.9%, respectively. The TChol prevalence was higher among girls (27.8%) than       the boys (19.1%). The overall prevalence of borderline-low+low HDL-chol was 12.2%       (boys 20.7%; girls 6.3%). The overall prevalence of dyslipidaemia was 13.7% (boys       14.9%; girls 12.9%). Low HDL-chol levels were the most prevalent dyslipidaemia in       boys (6.4%) and high TChol in girls (9.1%). Overweight/obese subjects were more       likely to have at least one abnormal lipid concentration (odds ratio (OR): 2.10;       95% confidence interval (CI): 1.06-4.15) and subjects with abdominal obesity were       more likely to have at least one abnormal lipid level (OR: 3.17; 95% CI:       1.04-9.66). CONCLUSIONS: One in ten Balearic Islands' adolescents has at least       one abnormal lipid concentration. Body mass index status and waist-to-height       ratio were associated with the prevalence of at least one abnormal lipid level.
AB  - During the early stages of the development of the living multiorgan systems,       genome modifications other than sequence variation occur that guide cell       differentiation and organogenesis. These modifications are known to operate as a       fetal programming code during this period, and recent research indicates that       there are some tissue-specific codes in organogenesis whose effects may persist       after birth until adulthood. Consequently, the events that disrupt the       pre-established epigenetic pattern could induce shifts in organ physiology, with       implications on health from birth or later in adult life. Chronic kidney disease       (CKD) is one of the main causes of mortality worldwide; its etiology is       multifactorial, but diabetes, obesity, and hypertension are the main causes of       CKD in adults, although there are other risk factors that are mainly associated       with an individual's lifestyle. Recent studies suggest that fetal reprogramming       in the developing kidney could be implicated in the susceptibility to kidney       disease in both childhood and adulthood. Some epigenetic modifications, such as       genome methylation status, dysregulation of miRNA, and histone coding alterations       in genes related to the regulation of the renin-angiotensin axis, a common       denominator in CKD, may have originated during fetal development. This review       focuses on epigenetic changes during nephrogenesis and their repercussions on       kidney health and disease. In addition, the focus is on the influence of       environmental factors during pregnancy, such as maternal metabolic diseases and       dietary and metabolic conditions, as well as some sex differences in fetal kidney       reprogramming during which dysregulation of the renin-angiotensin system is       involved.
AB  - Objectives: to analyze the changes of Ow+Ob in a cohort with four years of       evolution of students from Mexico elementary schools and to evaluate its       association with socio-demographic factors. Methods: information comes from a       nutritional surveillance system of 52,545 elementary schools, with weight and       height measurements from 2,008,474 children from six to eleven years old. A       follow-on panel longitudinal analysis was performed from 2015 to 2019 in a       dynamic cohort with three measurements. Ow+Ob prevalences were obtained; through       a logistic regression with random effects, odds ratios (OR) were calculated,       adjusting by sociodemographic characteristics (p < 0.05). Results: between 2015       and 2019, positive OR were observed for Ow+Ob development in 2017-2018 (OR =       1.02) and 2018-2019 (OR = 1.06). Students from the northern and southern regions       of the country showed a greater probability of suffering Ow+Ob (OR = 1.58 and       1.64) when compared with the center. Attending to community or indigenous schools       was a protective factor (OR = 0.54) whereas attending to a private school       increased the risk (OR = 1.75). Adjusted Ow+Ob prevalences showed an accelerated       increasing trend in males through all the periods. Conclusions: in Mexico,       obesity in school children is a growing problem related to sociodemographic       factors, therefore, urgent actions are needed for its restraining.
AB  - Environmental and lifestyle factors are known to play an important role during       gestation, determining newborns' health status and influencing their risk of       being subject to certain noncommunicable diseases later in life. In particular,       maternal nutritional patterns characterized by a low intake of plant-derived       foods could increase the risk of gestation-related issues, such as preeclampsia       and pregravid obesity, increase genotoxicant susceptibility, and contribute to       the onset of pediatric diseases. In particular, the risk of pediatric wheeze,       diabetes, neural tube defects, orofacial clefts, and some pediatric tumors seems       to be reduced by maternal intake of adequate amounts of vegetables, fruits, and       selected antioxidants. Nevertheless, plant-based diets, like any other diet, if       improperly balanced, could be deficient in some specific nutrients that are       particularly relevant during gestation, such as n-3 (ω-3) fatty acids, vitamin       B-12, iron, zinc, and iodine, possibly affecting the offspring's health state.       Here we review the scientific literature in this field, focusing specifically on       observational studies in humans, and highlight protective effects elicited by       maternal diets enriched in plant-derived foods and possible issues related to       maternal plant-based diets.
AB  - With increased globalization, Latin America is experiencing transitions from       traditional lifestyle and dietary practices to those found in higher income       countries. Healthy diets, physical activity and optimal body fat can prevent       approximately 15% of cancers in low-income and 20% in high-income countries. We       discuss links between diet, obesity, physical activity and cancer, emphasizing       strategies targeting children to decrease risk of obesity, control       obesity-related risk factors, and reduce sedentary lifestyles, as this will have       high impact on adult cancer risk. We focus on individual behaviors, economic,       cultural and societal changes that may guide future interventions in the       Americas.
AB  - Overweight (OW) and obesity (OB) during childhood/adolescence are major public       health problems in Mexico. Several obesogenic lifestyle (OL) risk factors have       been identified, but the burden and consequences of them in Mexican       children/adolescents remain unclear. The objective of this study was to estimate       the prevalence of OL components and describe their relationships with adiposity,       and OW/OB. A population-based cross-sectional study of Mexican       children/adolescents with nutritional assessment, data collection on daily habits       and adiposity as fat-mass index (FMI) by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry was       performed. Individual OL-components: "inactivity," "excessive screen time,"       "insufficient sleep," "unhealthy-diet", were defined according to non-adherence       to previously published healthy recommendations. Results: 1449 subjects were       assessed between March 2015 to April 2018. Sixteen percent of subjects had all       four OL-components, 40% had three, 35% had two, 9% had one, and 0.5% had none. A       cumulative OL score showed a significant dose-response effect with FMI. The       combination of inactivity, excessive screen time, and insufficient sleep showed       the highest risk association to OW/OB and higher values of FMI. Conclusions: The       prevalence of OL-components was extremely high and associated with increased       adiposity and OW/OB. Several interventions are needed to revert this major public       health threat.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Common variants rs6232 and rs6235 in the PCSK1 gene have been       associated with obesity in European populations. We aimed to evaluate the       contribution of these variants to obesity and related traits in Mexican children       and adults. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Rs6232 and rs6235 were genotyped in       2382 individuals, 1206 children and 1176 adults. Minor allele frequencies were       0.78% for rs6232 and 19.99% for rs6235. Rs6232 was significantly associated with       childhood obesity and adult class III obesity (OR = 3.01 95%CI 1.64-5.53; P = 4 ×       10⁻⁴ in the combined analysis). In addition, this SNP was significantly       associated with lower fasting glucose levels (P = 0.01) and with increased       insulin levels and HOMA-B (P = 0.05 and 0.01, respectively) only in non-obese       children. In contrast, rs6235 showed no significant association with obesity or       with glucose homeostasis parameters in any group. CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE:       Although rs6232 is rare in the Mexican population, it should be considered as an       important risk factor for extreme forms of obesity.
AB  - In the last decades, obesity and chronic kidney disease (CKD) have increased       worldwide, in parallel. This article focuses on the current issues of obesity on       renal damage, with special emphasis on what happens at pediatric ages. While       obesity has been linked closely with type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension,       reduced insulin sensitivity is a direct mechanism for renal damage. The       pathophysiologic mechanisms on renal damage include glomerular hyperfiltration       and hypertrophy, hypercellularity and broadening of the mesangial regions, while       the lack of sensitivity to insulin increases the effects of angiotensin II,       exacerbates proteinuria and induces the production of inflammatory cytokines.       Many epidemiological studies have documented the relationship of increased BMI       with the development of ERC, but most of these studies have been conducted in       adults. In children, the information is scarce, but is consistent with findings       in adults. In contrast, there are studies which show that interventions aimed to       improve weight loss and limit renal damage and proteinuria is reduced, the blood       pressure and glomerular filtration rate. Allthe above make us think on the need       to improve efforts to reduce the prevalence of obesity from the early stages of       life, which could reduce the number of patients with CKD in the future.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The increase in overweight and obese children and adolescents may be       linked to increased rates of dyslipidaemia. The aim was to assess the serum lipid       profile, the prevalence of dyslipidaemia, and associated risk factors among the       North Mexican adolescent population. METHODS: Two hundred and ninety-three       subjects (47.8% girls) ages 11 to 16 years took part in the Nuevo León State       Survey of Nutrition and Health 2011-2012. According to the 2011 Expert Panel on       Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children       and Adolescents, dyslipidaemia was defined as a presence of ≥1 of the following       levels (mg/dL): Total cholesterol ≥200, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol ≥130,       non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol <40, and triglyceride ≥130. RESULTS: The       overall frequency of dyslipidaemia was 48.8% with no differences between sexes.       Adolescents with high body mass index were more likely to have at least 1       abnormal lipid level (overweight: odds ratio [OR]: 2.07; 95% confidence interval       [CI]: 1.14-3.77, P < 0.05; obesity: OR: 2.21, 95% CI: 1.11-4.41, P < 0.05) than       those with normal weight. Abdominally subjects with obesity were also more likely       to have at least 1 abnormal lipid level (OR: 2.30; 95% CI: 1.35-3.91, P < 0.01)       than their leaner counterparts. CONCLUSIONS: Half of Mexican adolescents living       in the State of Nuevo León have at least 1 abnormal lipid concentration. Low       HDL-chol level was the most common dyslipidaemia. Body mass index and abdominal       obesity were associated with the prevalence of at least 1 abnormal lipid level.
AB  - Background There is no consensus on the definition of metabolically healthy       obesity (MHO) and the diagnostic criteria in children. Objectives To estimate the       prevalence of MHO and compare clinical and biochemical characteristics between       MHO and metabolically unhealthy obesity (MUO), and to evaluate the association       between MUO and cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk, anthropometrics and family       background using different definitions in children. Methods This was a       cross-sectional study. Participants included 224 obese children between the years       2007 and 2017. MHO was defined by three different criteria: (i) absence of       metabolic syndrome (MHO-MS), (ii) no insulin resistance (IR) by homeostatic model       assessment (HOMA) <3.16 cut-off (MHO-IR3.16) and (iii) absence of IR at <95th       percentile for Mexican children (MHO-95th). Results The prevalence of MHO-MS,       MHO-IR3.16 and MHO-IR95th was 12.9%, 56.3% and 41.5%, respectively. The       prevalence of simultaneous MHO-MS plus MHO-IR95th was 5.36%. Children with MHO-MS       vs. MUO-MS showed lower height, weight and body mass index (BMI) percentiles;       MHO-IR3.16 vs. MUO-IR3.16 showed lower age, acanthosis, Tanner, waist       circumference (WC), waist-to-height ratio (WHtR), systolic blood pressure (SBP),       diastolic blood pressure (DBP) and glucose; and MHO-IR95th vs. MUO-IR95th showed       lower acanthosis, WC, DBP, glucose and high high-density lipoprotein cholesterol       (HDL-C). MUO-MS was associated with WC > 90th, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in       first-degree relatives and obesity in siblings. MUO-IR3.16 was associated with       pubertal stages, WC > 90th, WHtR > 0.55 and fasting hyperglycemia. MUO-IR95th was       associated with WHtR > 0.55 and HDL < 10th. MHO-MS and MHO-IR3.16 or MHO-IR95th       did not have agreement. Conclusions The prevalence of MHO varied depending on the       definition, although the real MHO with no MS or IR is very low. Low DBP and high       HDL-C in MHO were present in any definition. Association of MUO with       anthropometric, biochemical and family background differs across definitions.
AB  - Diet and physical activity (PA) are essential components of nutritional status.       Adequate nutrition and an active lifestyle are key factors during childhood,       because food habits track into adulthood. Children spend more time in school than       in any other environment away from home. Studying the diet factors and patterns       of PA that affect obesity risk in children during school hours and the complete       school day can help identify opportunities to lower this risk. We directly       measured the time children spent performing moderate to vigorous PA (MVPA) at       school, compared the amount and intensity of PA during school hours with       after-school hours, and tried to determine if diet behaviors and PA or inactivity       were associated with excess weight and body fat. This cross-sectional study       included 143 normal-weight (NLW) and 48 obese children aged 8-10 y. Diet data       were obtained from two 24-h recalls. Body composition was measured by       bioimpedance. Screen time and sports participation data were self-reported. NLW       children drank/ate more dairy servings than the obese children, who consumed more       fruit-flavored water than the NLW group. Consumption of soft drinks, sugar-added       juices, and fresh juices was low in both groups. Children were less active during       school hours than after school. MVPA was lower during school hours in the obese       group than in the NLW group. Schools, parents, and authorities should be more       involved in promoting strategies to improve the dietary habits and PA levels of       school-aged children, because this group is not achieving the recommended level       of daily MVPA.
AB  - Food insecurity has been associated with decreased household food supplies, which       could affect children's fruit and vegetables intakes and increases their risk of       being overweight or obese. The aim of this study was to determine if food       insecurity was associated with lower fruit and vegetables consumption and       overweight and obesity in children from Mexican fishing communities. A       cross-sectional study was 4conducted with 100 elementary-school children aged       6-12 years. A survey that evaluated socioeconomic conditions, food insecurity,       and fruits and vegetables consumption was applied. Weight and height were       measured. The association between key variables and food insecurity was assessed       using linear regression. Sixty-four percent of households experienced food       insecurity. Food-insecure children reported lower consumption of fruits and       fruits plus vegetables than did their peers with food security (P trend = 0.040       and 0.038, respectively). Food insecurity was also associated with lower chance       to meet the recommendation of fruit and vegetable consumption (P trend in logit <       0.001), but was negatively associated with the prevalence of overweight and       obesity (P trend in logit < 0.001). Food-insecure children had lower fruits and       vegetables consumption but were no more likely to be overweight or obese than       their food-secure counterparts.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Childhood overweight and obesity is a global public health issue.       Although there is evidence of a reduced prevalence in some countries, there is       still much controversy about the efficacy of health interventions that aim to       prevent and treat obesity in this specific population. The objective of the       present study is to develop an overview of systematic reviews (OSRs) that       assesses the effects of school-based, family, and multi-component health       interventions for the prevention and treatment of obesity, change in physical       activity, dietary, and/or hydration behaviors, and change in metabolic risk       factors in school-aged children. METHODS: This protocol was developed using the       methodology proposed by Cochrane. It outlines a comprehensive search in 12       electronic databases to identify systematic reviews of health interventions,       including studies that evaluate and how to prevent and/or treat overweight and/or       obesity in children aged 6 to 12 years. The risk of bias of the included       Systematic Reviews will be assessed with the ROBIS tool. DISCUSSION: Since the       OSRs methodology's purpose is only to harmonize evidence from open access       publications, ethical consent is not necessary for the present protocol. In terms       of diffusion, a paper will be submitted for publication in a scientific journal       to describe the main results obtained through the OSRs. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The       present overview of the systematic review protocol has been registered in       PROSPERO (ID number 218296).
AB  - The epidemic of childhood obesity, the risk of developing left ventricular       hypertrophy, and evidence of the early development of atherosclerosis in children       would make the detection of and intervention in childhood hypertension important       to reduce long-term health risks; however, supporting data are lacking. Secondary       hypertension is more common in preadolescent children, with most cases caused by       renal disease. Primary or essential hypertension is more common in adolescents       and has multiple risk factors, including obesity and a family history of       hypertension. Evaluation involves a through history and physical examination,       laboratory tests, and specialized studies. Management is multifaceted.       Nonpharmacologic treatments include weight reduction, exercise, and dietary       modifications. Although the evidence of first line therapy for hypertension is       still controversial, the recommendations for pharmacologic treatment are based on       symptomatic hypertension, evidence of end-organ damage, stage 2 of hypertension,       or stage 1 of hypertension unresponsive to lifestyle modifications, and       hypertension with diabetes mellitus where is the search for microalbuminuria       justified.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The prevalence of overweight and obesity in children in Mexico are       high, as well as the complications associated with their presence. The objective       of this work was to estimate the prevalence of metabolic syndrome in obese       children and adolescents attending a Hospital Clinic and identify the associated       factors. METHODS: Cross sectional design with 120 children and adolescents; of       either sex, with exogenous obesity and BMI > 2.0 standard deviations. Personal       and family history was collected, blood pressure was measured and determination       of serum glucose, insulin, lipoprotein HDL cholesterol and triglycerides were       performed. The presence of metabolic syndrome with the ATPIII, WHO and       International Diabetes Federation criteria was identified. The association of       metabolic syndrome with different variables was identified with chi square test       and calculation of odds ratio. RESULTS: Mean age was 10.6 ± 2.7 years. The       prevalence of metabolic syndrome was 37.5% to 54.5% depending on the criteria       used. The presence of metabolic syndrome was associated with a history of large       birth weight (OR= 2.21 [1.01-4.82]), and insulin resistance (OR= 6.53       [2.40-18.2]). CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of metabolic syndrome is high in this       group of children and adolescents with obesity. The history of large birth weight       and the presence of insulin resistance should alert us to the presence of the       disease.
AB  - The development of metabolic diseases is linked to the gut microbiota. A       cross-sectional study involving 45 children (6 to 12 years old) was conducted to       investigate the relationship between gut microbiota and childhood obesity.       Anthropometric and metabolic measurements, food-frequency questionnaires (FFQs),       and feces samples were obtained. Using the body mass index (BMI) z-score, we       categorized each participant as normal weight (NW), or overweight and obese       (OWOB). We determined 2 dietary profiles: one with complex carbohydrates and       proteins (pattern 1), and the other with saturated fat and simple carbohydrates       (pattern 2). The microbial taxonomic diversity and metabolic capacity were       determined using shotgun metagenomics. We found differences between both BMI       groups diversity. Taxa contributing to this difference, included Eubacterium sp.,       Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Dialister, Monoglobus pectinilyticus,       Bifidobacterium pseudocatenulatum, Intestinibacter bartlettii, Bacteroides       intestinalis, Bacteroides uniformis, and Methanobrevibacter smithii. Metabolic       capacity differences found between NW and OWOB, included the amino acid       biosynthesis pathway, the cofactor, carrier, and vitamin biosynthesis pathway,       the nucleoside and nucleotide biosynthesis and degradation pathways, the       carbohydrate-sugar degradation pathway, and the amine and polyamine biosynthesis       pathway. We found significant associations between taxa such as Ruminococcus,       Mitsuokella multacida, Klebsiella variicola, and Citrobacter spp., metabolic       pathways with the anthropometric, metabolic, and dietary data. We also found the       microbiome's lipooligosaccharide (LOS) category as differentially abundant       between BMI groups. Metabolic variations emerge during childhood as a result of       complex nutritional and microbial interactions, which should be explained in       order to prevent metabolic illnesses in adolescence and maturity. IMPORTANCE The       alteration of gut microbiome composition has been commonly observed in diseases       involving inflammation, such as obesity and metabolic impairment. Inflammatory       host response in the gut can be a consequence of dietary driven dysbiosis. This       response is conducive to blooms of particular bacterial species, adequate to       survive in an inflammatory environment by means of genetical capability of       utilizing alternative nutrients. Understanding the genomic and metabolic       contribution of microbiota to inflammation, including virulence factor prevalence       and functional potential, will contribute to identifying modifiable early life       exposures and preventive strategies associated with obesity risk in childhood.
AB  - INTRODUCTION: Many parents have a misperception of their children's body size; in       general, they underestimate overweight and obesity. OBJECTIVE: To identify the       difference between parents' perception of their children's nutritional status and       measured body mass index. POPULATION AND METHODS: To identify the difference       between parents' perception of their children's nutritional status and measured       body mass index. RESULTS: A total of 605 children and their parents were       assessed. Seventy-four (12.2%) were overweight and 87 were obese (14.3%). There       were 161 overweight or obese children, but 98.8% (159) of parents underestimated       their children's nutritional status. Parents' underperception of their children's       body size accounted for an OR= 2.1 ± 0.5, p= 0.002 (95% confidence interval [CI]:       1.32-3.32) for obesity and an OR = 4.42 ± 1.2, p < 0.001 (95% CI: 2.631-7.439)       for overweight. CONCLUSIONS: Among parents of overweight and obese children,       98.8% (159) underestimated their children's weight status. Such underestimation       by parents may be a significant risk factor for the development and/or       persistence of overweight and obesity in their children.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To estimate the obesity prevalence among school-age children in Mexico       and define possible risk-associated factors. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data from       National Health and Nutrition Survey (Ensanut 2018-19) was used. Information from       6 268 school-age children and 5 670 teenagers was obtained. Logistic regression       models were esti-mated in order to study the relationship between overweight and       obesity (OW+O) and sociodemographic variables, OW+O condition in their parents,       health, dietary and healthy behaviors variables. RESULTS: . OW+O in school-age       children and teenagers is associated with the presence of OW+O in their mothers       (p<0.001), more time spent in front of a screen and belonging to a middle wealth       conditions index; a negative association was found for dietary fiber consumption.       In teenagers with obesity, the odds for depression showed an increase.       CONCLUSIONS: It is important to identify the predisposing and risk factors and       the causes behind obesity in children in order to design integral prevention       strategies.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Nine potentially modifiable risk factors (less childhood education,       midlife hearing loss, hypertension, and obesity, and later-life smoking,       depression, physical inactivity, social isolation, and diabetes) account for 35%       of worldwide dementia, but most data to calculate these risk factors come from       high-income countries only. We aimed to calculate population attributable       fractions (PAFs) for dementia in selected low-income and middle-income countries       (LMICs) to identify potential dementia prevention targets in these countries.       METHODS: The study was an analysis of cross-sectional data obtained from the       10/66 Dementia Research surveys of representative populations in India, China,       and six Latin America countries (Cuba, Dominican Republic, Mexico, Peru, Puerto       Rico, and Venezuela), which used identical risk factor ascertainment methods in       each country. Between 2004 and 2006 (and between 2007 and 2010 for Puerto Rico),       all residents aged 65 years and older in predefined catchment areas were invited       to participate in the survey. We used risk factor prevalence estimates from this       10/66 survey data, and relative risk estimates from previous meta-analyses, to       calculate PAFs for each risk factor. To account for individuals having       overlapping risk factors, we adjusted PAF for communality between risk factors,       and used these values to calculate overall weighted PAFs for India, China, and       the Latin American sample. FINDINGS: The overall weighted PAF for potentially       modifiable risk factors for dementia was 39·5% (95% CI 37·5-41·6) in China       (n=2162 participants), 41·2% (39·1-43·4) in India (n=2004), and 55·8% (54·9-56·7)       in our Latin American sample (n=12 865). Five dementia risk factors were more       prevalent in these LMICs than worldwide estimates, leading to higher PAFs for       dementia: less childhood education (weighted PAF of 10·8% in China, 13·6% in       India, and 10·9% in Latin America vs 7·5% worldwide), smoking (14·7%, 6·4%, and       5·7%, respectively, vs 5·5% worldwide), hypertension (6·4%, 4·0%, and 9·3%, vs       2·0%), obesity (5·6%, 2·9%, and 7·9%, vs 0·8%), and diabetes (1·6%, 1·7%, and       3·2%, vs 1·2%). INTERPRETATION: The dementia prevention potential in India,       China, and this sample of Latin American countries is large, and greater than in       high-income countries. Less education in early life, hypertension, hearing loss,       obesity, and physical inactivity have particularly high PAFs and could be initial       targets for dementia prevention strategies. FUNDING: No funding.
AB  - The prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Mexico is 14.4%. This disease is       characterized by a state of hyperglycemia and chronic inflammation secondary to       inadequate insulin secretion and its resistance. Among its risk factors for       metabolic diseases development, the interaction between obesity, sedentary       lifestyle, hypercaloric diets and genetic variants play an important role. For       decades, different basic and applied research groups have worked in an       interdisciplinary way to provide scientific evidence that has helped to       understand the mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of T2D in Mexicans.       However, today the urgency of the advance and better proposals for prevention and       management of patients with T2D makes it necessary to use translational medicine,       which integrates scientific knowledge with the use of innovative technologies to       provide comprehensive health care. In this sense, the present document concisely       describes, with a translational approach, the implications of the interaction of       environmental and genetic risk factors in the development of childhood obesity       and T2D in Mexico.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to evaluate the relationship between       maternal and childhood BMI at baseline in a group of 5- to 18-year-old children       and their mothers, all of whom were of Mexican origin, low socioeconomic status,       and enrolled in a cohort study in Houston, TX. RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES:       Using data from 438 mother-child dyads residing in the same household, we       completed logistic regression analyses to determine maternal factors associated       with the child being overweight or at-risk-for-overweight, after adjusting for       the child's gender, age, and level of physical activity and other maternal       confounders. RESULTS: Almost one-half of the boys and girls (47% and 44%,       respectively) were either overweight or at-risk-for-overweight. Obese mothers       were twice as likely to have an overweight and/or at-risk-for-overweight child       compared with normal-weight mothers. Women born in the U.S. were twice as likely       to have an overweight and/or at-risk-for-overweight child compared with women       born in Mexico. In addition, women with less than a high school education were       twice as likely to have an overweight child compared with their more educated       peers. DISCUSSION: The high prevalence of overweight or at-risk-for-overweight       among Mexican-origin children of low socioeconomic status suggests a continued       need to develop and implement culturally sensitive preventive interventions for       this minority population. Our data also suggest a need to tailor such       interventions particularly for children of obese mothers and those born in the       U.S.
AB  - Worldwide obesity has reached the proportion of an epidemic. A well-established       fact is that nowadays many low-and middle-income countries are facing a "double       burden" of disease, dealing with under-nutrition on one side, and on the other       experiencing a rapid rise in non-communicable disease risk factors such as       obesity and overweight, particularly in urban settings. Behavioral components are       strongly influencing obesity spread and development, especially when considering       TV and advertising. There is, therefore, the need of multi-cultural and       cross-cultural research, in order to gain a full understanding of the association       between obesity and different risk factors, in different scenarios, providing the       best evidence to decision makers, grounding prevention on evidence-based       strategies rather than focusing on single factors without the recognition of       their mutual influence.
AB  - Obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) result from sedentary lifestyle,       high-carbohydrate diets and genetic predisposition. Epigenetics is a form of       genetic regulation in specialized cells that does not involve changes in the       deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence, but it can be inherited to one or more       generations through mitosis or meiosis. Children whose mothers develop       gestational diabetes are more likely to become obese and diabetic in adult life.       DNA methylation is a major mechanism in the regulation of transcription and gene       expression of several genes. High levels of glucose and insulin during pregnancy       modify the risk of developing T2DM, suggesting that the expression pattern is       modified due to cell memory in a specific tissue. If T2DM is linked to adaptation       in utero, the obvious primary prevention is to protect the fetal development.       Future epidemiological studies need to employ more accurate indicators or markers       of development to show the relationship between a specific disease and the       exposure to environmental factors. The mechanisms by which malnutrition, and       intrauterine growth retardation produce changes in the metabolism of glucose and       insuline are worth to explore in order to control obesity and T2DM.
AB  - AIM: Acanthosis nigricans (AN) is a strong correlate of obesity and is considered       a marker of insulin resistance (IR). AN is associated with various other       cardiometabolic risk factors (CMRFs). However, the direct causal relationship of       IR with AN in obesity has been debated. Therefore, we aimed to examine the       complex causal relationships among the troika of AN, obesity, and IR in Mexican       Americans (MAs). METHODS: We used data from 670 non-diabetic MA children, aged       6-17 years (49% girls). AN (prevalence 33%) severity scores (range 0-5) were used       as a quasi-quantitative trait (AN-q) for analysis. We used the program SOLAR for       determining phenotypic, genetic, and environmental correlations between AN-q and       CMRFs (e.g., BMI, HOMA-IR, lipids, blood pressure, hs-C-reactive protein (CRP),       and Harvard physical fitness score (PFS)). The genetic and environmental       correlations were subsequently used in mediation analysis (AMOS program). Model       comparisons were made using goodness-of-fit indexes. RESULTS: Heritability of       AN-q was 0.75 (p<0.0001). It was positively/significantly (p<0.05) correlated       with traits such as BMI, HOMA-IR, and CRP, and negatively with HDL-C and PFS. Of       the models tested, indirect mediation analysis of BMI→HOMA-IR→AN-q yielded lower       goodness-of-fit than a partial mediation model where BMI explained the       relationship with both HOMA-IR and AN-q simultaneously. Using complex models, BMI       was associated with AN-q and IR mediating most of the CMRFs; but no relationship       between IR and AN-q. CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that obesity explains the       association of IR with AN, but no causal relationship between IR and AN in       Mexican American children.
AB  - INTRODUCTION: The prevalence of childhood obesity has risen dramatically in       recent years. A proportion of this burden has been attributed to factors that       occur during the first 1000 days of life such as genetic predisposition, breast       feeding and complementary feeding. Although the mechanisms by which these factors       affect weight and adiposity are less well understood, appetite and satiety       regulation may be a key to understanding them. This cohort study aims to       investigate the role of appetite and satiety regulation as a mediator in the       association between infant feeding practices and genetic polymorphisms with       children's growth, adiposity and metabolic risk factors. METHODS AND ANALYSIS:       'MAS-Lactancia' (the first word means 'more' and is also an acronym in Spanish       for 'Appetite and Satiety Mechanisms', the second word is 'breastfeeding') is an       open, ongoing, prospective birth cohort that began the enrolment in 2016 of       mother-child pairs affiliated to the Mexican Social Security Institute and that       live in the city of Cuernavaca, Mexico. Pregnant women between 16-week and       22-week gestation are followed during the second half of their pregnancies, at       birth and throughout their infant's first 48 months of life (at 1 month, 3       months, 6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 18 months, 24 months, 36 months and 48       months) at the clinic and at-home visits that include questionnaires,       anthropometric measurements and biospecimen collection. The main exposure       variables are infant feeding (breast feeding and complementary feeding) and       genetic polymorphisms (fat mass and obesity-associated, leptin and adiponectin       genes). Outcome variables include infant's growth, adiposity and metabolic risk       factors. We will conduct longitudinal models and path analyses to identify the       potential mediating role of satiety and appetite indicators (leptin, adiponectin,       insulin concentrations, appetite and satiety perception). ETHICS AND       DISSEMINATION: The study protocol, data collection instruments, consent forms and       procedures were approved by the institutional review boards of the National       Institute of Public Health and the Mexican Social Security Institute in Mexico.       Findings will be disseminated through conferences, peer-reviewed publications and       meetings with stakeholders.
AB  - BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Mexico has one of the highest prevalence of childhood       obesity in the world. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for obesity have       identified multiple single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in populations of       European, East Asian, and African descent. The contribution of these loci to       obesity in Mexican children is unclear. We assessed the transferability of 98       obesity loci in Mexican children and fine-mapped the association signals.       SUBJECTS/METHODS: The study included 405 and 390 Mexican children with normal       weight and obesity. Participants were genotyped with a genome-wide dense SNP       array designed for Latino populations, allowing for the analysis of GWAS index       SNPs as well as fine-mapping SNPs, totaling 750 SNPs covering 98 loci. Two       genetic risk scores (GRS) were constructed: a "discovery GRS" and a       "best-associated GRS", representing the number of effect alleles at the GWAS       index SNPs and at the best-associated SNPs after fine-mapping for each subject.       RESULTS: Seventeen obesity loci were significantly associated with obesity, and       five had fine-mapping SNPs significantly better associated with obesity than       their corresponding GWAS index SNPs in Mexican children. Six obesity-associated       SNPs significantly departed from additive to dominant (N = 5) or recessive       (N = 1) models, and a significant interaction was found between rs274609 (TNNI3K)       and rs1010553 (ITIH4) on childhood obesity risk. The best-associated GRS was       significantly more associated with childhood obesity (OR = 1.21 per additional       risk allele [95%CI:1.17-1.25], P = 4.8 × 10(-25)) than the discovery GRS       (OR = 1.05 per additional risk allele [95%CI:1.02-1.08], P = 8.0 × 10(-4)), and       was also associated with waist-to-hip ratio, fasting glucose, fasting insulin and       triglyceride levels, the association being mediated by obesity. An overall       depletion of obesity risk alleles was observed in Mexican children with normal       weight when compared to GWAS discovery populations. CONCLUSIONS: Our study       indicates a partial transferability of GWAS obesity loci in Mexican children, and       supports the pertinence of post-GWAS fine-mapping experiments in the admixed       Mexican population.
AB  - This study aimed to investigate the prevalence rates for overweight and obesity       among Mexican schoolchildren, identifying factors associated with the outcomes. A       cross-sectional study was conducted in a sample consisting of 700 schoolchildren.       Prevalence rates were calculated according to age and gender, and odds ratios       were estimated by point and intervals, using multivariate logistic regression.       Overweight and obesity prevalence were 28.1% and 13.7%, respectively. Risk       factors for overweight were: mother's schooling (in years); eating while studying       or watching TV; scores for risk food items > or = 12 points; sedentary activities       > or = 1.6 hours/day, and birth weight > or = 2,890 grams. Obesity risk factors       were similar to those related to overweight. Higher frequency of sport activities       was detected as a protective factor in both outcomes. The associated factors for       overweight and obesity highlighted the focus for health programs to prevent       chronic diseases in this population, for which risk factors can already be       identified in childhood.
AB  - Background Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most prevalent       chronic hepatic disorder in the pediatric population and has grown along with the       obesity pandemic in which we live today. Adipose tissue storage in the upper body       segment has been positively correlated with visceral adiposity and metabolic       disease, which suggests that neck circumference could represent an easily       accessible and replicable anthropometric measurement to identify patients with a       higher risk of developing NAFLD. The main purpose of this study is to determine       if there is an association between neck circumference and NAFLD. The secondary       objectives are to establish cutoff values based on gender and puberty staging.       Methods We included a sample pediatric population of 112 patients diagnosed with       obesity aged between 6 and 18 years. We performed anthropometric and metabolic       measurements on every patient, and NAFLD diagnosis was determined with hepatic       ultrasound. Results The neck circumference was larger in NAFLD pediatric patients       compared to those without NAFLD (p = 0.001). In a multivariate analysis, the neck       circumference was associated with NAFLD as an independent risk factor (odds ratio       [OR] = 1.172; 95% CI = 1.008-1.362; p = 0.038). Tanner 2-3 = 35 cm and Tanner       4-5 = 38 cm were established as risk cutoff values to develop NAFLD in the male       adolescent population. Conclusions There is an association between the neck       circumference and NAFLD in pediatric patients with obesity, particularly in the       male population.
AB  - Exercise-induced irisin, a recently discovered myokine, has been linked to       insulin resistance, obesity, and other diseases in adults; however, information       in children is scarce and contradictory. We analyzed the limited evidence of       irisin's effects in children and adolescents, and its association with body       composition, exercise training, cardiovascular risk factors, and metabolic       diseases, as well as the results of dietetic interventions. Both positive and       negative correlations between irisin concentrations and body mass index, fat       mass, fat-free mass, and other anthropometric parameters were found. Likewise,       contradictory evidence was shown associating irisin plasma levels with       cardiovascular and metabolic parameters such as glucose, insulin resistance, and       cholesterol and other lipid and fatty acid plasma levels in healthy children, as       well as in those with obesity and the metabolic syndrome. Gender, puberty, and       hormonal differences were also examined. Furthermore, important contradictory       findings according to the type and duration of exercise and of dietetic       interventions in healthy and unhealthy subjects were demonstrated. In addition,       correlations between mother⁻infant relations and circulating irisin were also       identified. This review discusses the potential role of irisin in health and       disease in the pediatric population.
AB  - INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to explore the risk factors that       contribute to obesity in Mexican American children compared with Mexican American       normal weight children. No hypotheses were tested in the study. When risk factors       are known, nurses can use evidence to reduce risky behavior. METHOD: A       cross-sectional descriptive design was used, comparing two groups of children to       discern the risk factors for obesity. The setting is a county in South Texas       along the border with Mexico. The sample consisted of 55 Mexican American dyads       (mother-child). The following measures, based on the Ecological Model of Growth,       were used to collect data: anthropometrics, dietary data of children, home       environment, perceived stress of mother, and maternal acculturation. Independent       sample t tests, chi-square tests, Fisher exact tests, and a hierarchical logistic       regression analysis were used to analyze the data. RESULTS: The findings show       children's age and maternal body mass index (BMI) are positively correlated with       childhood obesity, as measured by BMI percentile by age/sex. There were       significant differences in the host and agent factors of prolonged bottle       feeding, amount of outdoor play, and fruit drinks between normal weight and obese       children. DISCUSSION: Engagement and involvement of other family members in       outdoor activities, nutrition/feeding, and child care may mitigate the negative       effects of host and agent factors on child body size.
AB  - Cancer treatments are associated with short and long-effects. Epidemiological       reports have revealed clinical features of metabolic syndrome (MS), obesity or       overweight in young cancer survivors. The aim of the study was to examine the       prevalence of unhealthy weight status and risk factors associated with MS related       to chemotherapy. We study 52 pediatric cancer patients and analyze cholesterol,       triglycerides, glycosylated hemoglobin, body mass index, waist circumference       (WC), FINDRISC test. All the parameters were analyzed according to the percentile       corresponding to sex and age of each child. The data show an important       modification in weight, body mass index, and WC as in triglycerides, and       cholesterol that could be associated with the development of MS. The variance       analysis showed that the WC, triglycerides, and cholesterol are statistically       correlated in our population. A follow-up for MS in children cancer survivor       should be considered necessary.
AB  - Differences and similarities in cancer patterns between the country of Mexico and       the United States' Mexican population, 11% of the entire US population, have not       been studied. Mortality data from 2008 to 2012 in Mexico and California were       analyzed and compared for causes of cancer death among adult and pediatric       populations, using standard techniques and negative binomial regression. A total       of 380,227 cancer deaths from Mexico and California were included. Mexican       Americans had 49% and 13% higher mortality than their counterparts in Mexico       among males and females, respectively. For Mexican Immigrants in the US, overall       cancer mortality was similar to Mexico, their country of birth, but       all-cancers-combined rates mask wide variation by specific cancer site. The most       extreme results were recorded when comparing Mexican Americans to Mexicans in       Mexico: with mortality rate ratios ranging from 2.72 (95% CI: 2.44-3.03) for       colorectal cancer in males to 0.28 (95% CI: 0.24-0.33) for cervical cancer in       females. These findings further reinforce the preeminent role that the       environment, in its multiple aspects, has on cancer. Overall, mortality from       obesity and tobacco-related cancers was higher among Mexican origin populations       in the US compared to Mexico, suggesting a higher risk for these cancers, while       mortality from prostate, stomach, and especially cervical and pediatric cancers       was markedly higher in Mexico. Among children, brain cancer and neuroblastoma       patterns suggest an environmental role in the etiology of these malignancies as       well. Partnered research between the US and Mexico for cancer studies is       warranted.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Some studies have found a negative relationship between obesity and       school performance in scholars. However, this topic has not been studied in depth       in Mexico. The aim of this study was to analyze the association between       overweight and obesity with school performance in secondary school students from       Merida. METHODS: Weight and height were measured, and body mass index was       calculated in a sample of 566 secondary students in Merida. Nutritional status       was classified in normal weight (-2-<+1 standard deviation [SD]), overweight       (+1-<2 SD) and obesity (> + 2 SD) according to the World Health Organization       criteria. The scores in language, mathematics and sciences were used as       indicators of school performance. Good performance was considered when the scores       were ≥8 points, and poor performance when scores were <8 points. Logistic       regression models were used to analyse the association between the variables.       RESULTS: The 44% of the sample met the criteria for overweight and obesity. After       adjusting for school grade, type of school, number of absences, and Mayan       surnames, we found that girls classified as obese had a significant risk of a       poor performance in mathematics (odds ratio [OR]: 3.07; 95% confidence interval       [CI]: 1.39-6.80) and language (OR: 2.55; 95% CI: 1.14-5.71) compared with those       with healthy weight. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that obesity represents a       risk of having a lower school performance in girls but not in boys.
AB  - Background: Differences in gut microbiota composition have been associated with       obesity and metabolic alterations in children. The aim of this study was to       analyze the abundance of the main bacterial families of the gut among children       according to their body composition and metabolic markers. Methods: A       cross-sectional study was conducted with 93 school-aged children (8.4 ± 1.6 years       old). Anthropometric and body composition variables were measured and a blood       sample was collected to determine glucose, insulin, lipid profile, C-reactive       protein, leptin, and cytokines [interleukin 6, interleukin 10 (IL-10), tumor       necrosis factor α (TNFα)]. DNA was extracted from stool samples and the abundance       of bacterial families (Bacteroidaceae-Porphyromonadaceae-Prevotellaceae,       Lactobacillaceae, Enterococcaceae, and Lachnospiraceae-Ruminococcaceae) was       determined by qPCR assays. Results: Children with obesity and high waist/height       ratio had lower Bacteroidaceae-Porphyromonadaceae-Prevotellaceae and higher       abundance of Lactobacillaceae when compared with normal-weight children. TNFα was       negatively associated and IL-10 was positively associated with       Bacteroidaceae-Porphyromonadaceae-Prevotellaceae. Triglycerides showed a positive       relationship with Lachnospiraceae-Ruminococcaceae whereas high-density       lipoprotein-cholesterol was negatively associated with Lactobacillaceae.       Conclusion: In rural Mexican school-aged children, a low abundance of       Bacteroidaceae-Porphyromonadaceae-Prevotellaceae and a high abundance of       Lactobacillaceae are associated with obesity and metabolic disturbances.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Nutrition transition provokes changes in the nutritional status of       individuals subjected to the interaction of various environmental factors;       therefore, the aim was to demonstrate that nutrition transition is associated       with socioeconomic changes, eating habits and physical activity, potentially       involved in stunting, overweight and obesity of schoolchildren. METHODS:       Case-control study. 102 participants from the Instituto Alteño para el Desarrollo       de Jalisco (cases) and 194 from the elementary school system (controls), aged 5       to 12 years, were included. Dependent variables were these indexes weight/age       (Z), height/age (Z), BMI (Z). Independent variables were the socioeconomic and       demographic characteristics. Student's t test, chi square, odds ratio (OR) and       95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were estimated. RESULTS: Family income was low       (p = 0.031) and unstable job was higher in cases: OR = 4.1, 95% CI = 2.8-6.0. The       frequency of stunting was higher in cases (9.9% vs. 5.9%). The combination of       overweight/obesity was higher in controls (27.3% vs. 16.8%), OR = 1.85, 95% CI =       1.0-3.4. CONCLUSIONS: The nutritional status of children of Arandas, Jalisco, has       been modified by an accelerate nutrition transition, provoked by socioeconomic,       educational and demographic factors that might have influence on the persistence       of stunting and an increasing prevalence of overweight/obesity.
AB  - Millions of Mexico, US and across the world children are overweight and obese.       Exposure to fossil-fuel combustion sources increases the risk for obesity and       diabetes, while long-term exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and ozone       (O3) above US EPA standards is associated with increased risk of Alzheimer's       disease (AD). Mexico City Metropolitan Area children are chronically exposed to       PM2.5 and O3 concentrations above the standards and exhibit systemic, brain and       intrathecal inflammation, cognitive deficits, and Alzheimer disease       neuropathology. We investigated adipokines, food reward hormones, endothelial       dysfunction, vitamin D and apolipoprotein E (APOE) relationships in 80 healthy,       normal weight 11.1±3.2 year olds matched by age, gender, BMI and SES, low (n: 26)       versus high (n:54) PM2.5 exposures. Mexico City children had higher leptin and       endothelin-1 (p<0.01 and p<0.000), and decreases in glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP       1), ghrelin, and glucagon (<0.02) versus controls. BMI and leptin relationships       were significantly different in low versus high PM2.5 exposed children. Mexico       City APOE 4 versus 3 children had higher glucose (p=0.009). Serum       25-hydroxyvitamin D<30 ng/mL was documented in 87% of Mexico City children.       Leptin is strongly positively associated to PM 2.5 cumulative exposures. Residing       in a high PM2.5 and O3 environment is associated with 12h fasting       hyperleptinemia, altered appetite-regulating peptides, vitamin D deficiency, and       increases in ET-1 in clinically healthy children. These changes could signal the       future trajectory of urban children towards the development of insulin       resistance, obesity, type II diabetes, premature cardiovascular disease,       addiction-like behavior, cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease. Increased       efforts should be made to decrease pediatric PM2.5 exposures, to deliver health       interventions prior to the development of obesity and to identify and mitigate       environmental factors influencing obesity and Alzheimer disease.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: CardioVascular Disease (CVD) is one of the most important causes of       death worldwide affecting people at younger ages every year. The purpose of this       study was to identify the metabolic indicators for cardiovascular risk factors in       primary school students from Mexico and Colombia. METHODS: A clinical,       prospective, cross-sectional and comparative study was conducted in Mexico and       Colombia to contrast anthropometric measurements, biochemical and dietetic       determinations and physical activity. RESULTS: The Waist-Hip Ratio (WHR) and the       Waist-to-Height Ratio (WtHR) showed significant differences (p≤0.001) between       Mexico and Colombia (0.8 ± 0.1 versus 0.5 ± 0.1) and (0.4 ± 0.06 vs. 0.78 ± 0.04)       respectively. The Automatic Linear Modeling showed that the main predictors for       cholesterol levels were WtHR, MonoUnsaturated Fatty Acids (MUFA) and lipids       ingestion. For glucose there were four main predictors: WHR, carbohydrates, MUFA       and Saturated Fatty Acids (SFA). For triglycerides the pedictors were Products of       Animal Origin (PAO), BMI, waist circumference, lipids and cholesterol ingestion       and Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP). The Weight Estimation tests weighted per gender       showed that for glucose levels the main determinants were carbohydrates, MUFA and       oils; for cholesterol these were MUFA, PUFA and oils; and for LDL the significant       variables were proteins, SFA, PAO and sugars; and last, for triglycerides the       main variables were BMI, cholesterol and vegetables. CONCLUSIONS: Mexico has       higher values in almost all items of cardiovascular risk in children, but both       countries have significant percentages of obesity and the population free of       cardiovascular risk is minimal.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Due to multiple and interacting factors, Latino children are       disproportionately at risk for overweight and obesity in the United States.       Childhood obesity increases the risk for adverse physical and psychosocial       outcomes throughout the lifespan. Intensive behavioral interventions recommended       in primary care settings may not conform to current practices, and the most       vulnerable populations are often unable to access these services. Community       Health Workers (CHWs) offer a promising approach to bridging the gap between       vulnerable communities and culturally competent services. La Vida Buena (The Good       Life) is an 8-week family-focused intervention for Latino children 5-8 years old       and their parents or caregivers who are patients at a Federally-Qualified       Community Health Center (FQHC). It is a culturally and linguistically appropriate       curriculum, facilitated by CHWs, that targets family behaviors to foster a       healthy lifestyle in order to prevent and mitigate childhood overweight and       obesity. METHODS: The primary objective is to test the effectiveness of the La       Vida Buena (LVB) childhood obesity program among Latino children 5-8 years old       and their families as compared with a single educational session. This study uses       a parallel two-arm quasi-experimental design. The intervention group receives the       8-week La Vida Buena intervention and the comparison group receives a single       educational session. The primary outcome is the change in the child's BMI z-score       from baseline to 6 months. DISCUSSION: The implementation and evaluation of La       Vida Buena may inform research and practice for linking Latino patients in FQHCs       to culturally responsive community-based childhood obesity interventions. It will       also contribute to the literature about CHWs as facilitators of behavior change       for families underserved by health services and preventive programs. La Vida       Buena can serve as a culturally and linguistically appropriate early intervention       curriculum that will foster a healthy home environment for childhood obesity       mitigation and prevention. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The trial was retrospectively       registered on December 18, 2018. The ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier is       NCT03781856.
AB  - INTRODUCTIÓN: Obesity is a serious public health problem in Mexico, the National       Health and Nutrition Survey (ENSANUT 2012) reported a 34.4% prevalence of       overweight, and obesity in children aged 5-11. Recent research has suggested that       the gut microbiota may be a risk factor of obesity through its influence on human       metabolism. AIM OF THE STUDY: To evaluate association between the intestinal       microbiota profile and obesity among children and whether this association is       modified depending on the feeding pattern of a sample of schoolchildren from       Mexico City. METODOLOGY AND RESULTS: Cross-sectional study on 1042 children aged       6-14 years; physical activity questionnaire, personal medical history and       heredofamilial of obesity and type 2 diabetes were administered to all the       children. Eating patterns was performed by principal component analysis (PCA).       The association between intestinal microbiota and overweight / obesity depending       on diet was assessed with logistic regression models. CONCLUSION: Our results       shows that the interaction between the intestinal microbiota and diet,       particularly high in fats and simple carbohydrates increases the chance of       developing obesity.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the impact of an 18-month school obesity prevention       intervention on the health behaviors of 4th and 5th grade students based on       ecological principles and formative research conducted in Mexico. MATERIALS AND       METHODS: A Randomized Control Trial (RCT), design was used to assign 27 schools       to one of three conditions: basic or plus interventions and control. School       environment measures, children's eating and physical activity behaviors, and body       mass index were assessed four times over a 2-year period in a sample of 830       students. RESULTS: In the intervention schools, the availability of healthy foods       increased with a concomitant decrease in unhealthy food availability. Food intake       showed the same trend. In the intervention schools, children did not engage in       more moderate to vigorous physical activity (MVPA) in physical education (PE)       class or recess but increased steps taken. Obesity prevalence did not change.       CONCLUSION: The intervention improved the school food environment and child       healthy behaviors.
AB  - Mexico has one of the highest overweight and obesity rates in the world. Our       objective is to describe the tendency of overweight and obesity by sex, health       service affiliation, and socioeconomic tertile (T1,2,3), and to give examples of       public policies derived from the results of the Mexican National Health and       Nutrition Surveys (ENSANUT). Data come from the 2006, 2012, and 2016 ENSANUTs,       which are probabilistic surveys that allow us to make inferences at the national       level, on urban and rural strata and regions; their coverage includes all the       population age groups. We assessed overweight and obesity (OW + O) in all       population groups. The prevalence of OW + O in preschool children was lower in T1       in all the surveys, and shows an increase by year of survey, according to the       health service affiliation. In school-age women, prevalence increased over the 10       years of evaluation, in spite of the high prevalence in both genders in T3.       Adolescent behavior is similar and, in adults, the prevalence of OW + O shows an       increase by year of survey, gender, and affiliation, with the differences not       explained by socioeconomic tertile. In conclusion, the ENSANUT series represents       a surveillance system that allow us to observe the changes in overweight and       obesity prevalence over the time, showing a high prevalence of OW + O in the       population, and has contributed to public policy enhancement.
AB  - BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The number of colony-forming unit (CFU)-Hill colonies has       been proposed as a biomarker of vascular function and cardiovascular risk in       adults but information about its role in children is scarce. This study evaluates       the associations between obesity, cardiovascular risk factors and breastfeeding       history with the numbers of CFU-Hill colonies in a sample of young people.       METHODS AND RESULTS: We selected 49 children and teenagers between ages 10 and 17       (65.3% boys) from Mexican Health Care system. Physical activity and       Anthropometric measures data were registered. CFU-Hill colonies were cultured       from mononuclear cells obtained from venous blood. We detected inverse       associations between the formation of CFU-Hill colonies and body mass index (BMI;       β = -1.53; 95% confidence interval [CI], -1.92, -1.13), triglycerides (β = -0.26;       95%CI = -0.34, -0.18), total cholesterol (β = -0.13; 95%CI = -0.17, -0.08), Low       Density Lipoprotein (LDL) (β = -0.20; 95%CI = -0.31, -0.09) and glucose       (β = -0.37; 95%CI = -0.55, -0.18) using multivariate models. Breastfeeding       duration showed a 1.46-colony increase for each month of breastfeeding       (95%CI = 0.73, 2.18). CONCLUSIONS: CFU-Hill colony-forming capacity in children       and teenagers was inversely associated with obesity, dyslipidemia and high blood       levels of glucose. In contrast a longer breastfeeding duration was directly       associated with an increased number of CFU-Hill colonies. However these results       must be confirmed with further studies. Our findings support the importance of       promoting breastfeeding and monitoring nutritional and metabolic status at an       early age to prevent chronic disease development.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To document the prevalence of overweight or obesity concurrent with       stunting in rural low-income Mexican children and to identify demographic and       socio-economic characteristics that could help identify families at risk of       having an overweight/obese and stunted young child in this population. DESIGN:       Cross-sectional analysis of the nutritional status of very young children, using       primary data from a rural community-based survey conducted in 2003. Overweight,       obesity and stunting were documented along with several maternal, household and       community characteristics. SETTING: Impoverished areas of rural Mexico. SUBJECTS:       Pre-school children (n=7555), aged 24-72 months. RESULTS: The combined prevalence       of overweight and obesity was equal to or greater than 20% in all children, as       was the prevalence of stunting. The prevalence of concurrent overweight or       obesity and stunting was approximately 5% in non-indigenous children, and over       10% in indigenous children 24-60 months. A multinomial logistic analysis revealed       that the factors associated with coexisting stunting and overweight/obesity were       lower socio-economic status (SES), lower maternal age, education, intelligence       (vocabulary) and perceived social status, shorter maternal height, and larger       household size. Among only stunted children, the risk of also being overweight or       obese was associated with younger maternal age (relative risk ratios (RRR): 0.98,       P=0.05), lower maternal perceived social status (RRR: 0.95, P<0.01) and maternal       obesity (RRR: 2.93, P<0.0001) or overweight (RRR: 1.50, P=0.002). CONCLUSIONS:       These analyses highlight that concurrent overweight or obesity and stunting is an       important public health issue in low-income areas of rural Mexico beginning in       early childhood. Even within this impoverished population, children living in       households with low relative SES are the most vulnerable. SPONSORSHIP: Financial       support for this research was provided by the National Institutes of Child Health       and Human Development, the Fogarty International Center at NIH, the John D and       Catherine T MacArthur Foundation 'Research Network on Socioeconomic Status and       Health' and the Mexican Government.
AB  - Dietary energy density (DED) has been widely considered a risk factor for weight       gain. In adolescents, however, the evidence is inconclusive, and in Mexico, the       ways in which DED is associated with overweight and obesity are unknown. Our       study analysed the association of DED with overweight or obesity (OW-O) in       Mexican adolescents included in the National Health and Nutrition Survey 2012       (ENSANUT 2012). We analysed the data from a 7-day Food Frequency Questionnaire       administered to 2,203 Mexican adolescents aged 12-19 years. DED was calculated       excluding all beverages. Plausible and implausible reporters were identified       based on the relationship between the reported energy intake and the estimated       energy requirement. The association of DED with body mass index (BMI)-for-age and       OW-O was analysed using multivariate statistical models restricted to plausible       reporters. The combined prevalence of overweight and obesity was 35.4% in the       complete sample and 27.8% in the sample of plausible reporters. Mean DED was       177 kcal/100 g, with higher DED in the north of the country. The proportion of       plausible reporters was 38.5%. We found a positive association between high DED       and the BMI-for-age z-score (β = 0.347; 95% CI [0.101, 0.594]; P = 0.006),       controlling for sociodemographic and dietary variables, but no significant       association with OW-O. It is necessary to consider the DED in the design and       implementation of strategies to reduce energy density in the diets of young       Mexicans.
AB  - Ultra-processed foods are ready-to-heat and ready-to-eat products created to       replace traditional homemade meals and dishes due to convenience and       accessibility. Because of their low-fiber and high-fat and sugar composition,       these foodstuffs could induce a negative impact on health. They are partially       responsible for obesity and chronic non-transmissible diseases; additionally,       they could impact in the prevalence of autoimmune diseases such as type 1       diabetes and celiac disease. The rationale is that the nutritional composition of       ultra-processed foodstuffs can induce gut dysbiosis, promoting a pro-inflammatory       response and consequently, a "leaky gut". These factors have been associated with       increased risk of autoimmunity in genetically predisposed children. In addition,       food emulsifiers, commonly used in ultra-processed products could modify the gut       microbiota and intestinal permeability, which could increase the risk of       autoimmunity. In contrast, unprocessed and minimally processed food-based diets       have shown the capacity to promote gut microbiota eubiosis, anti-inflammatory       response, and epithelial integrity, through bacterial butyrate production. Thus,       to decrease the susceptibility to autoimmunity, genetically predisposed children       should avoid ultra-processed food products and encourage the consumption of fresh       and minimally processed foods.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: Describir el papel de la percepción del gusto como factor de riesgo       para el desarrollo de obesidad en niños. MATERIALS AND METHODS: ulos científicos       publicados en PubMed entre el 1 de enero de 2011 y el 20 de marzo de 2016 para el       tema sobrepeso y obesidad en niños de entre 0 y 12 años. Los algoritmos       utilizados fueron (Obesity OR Overweight) AND Taste perception, Satiation,       Satiety response, Appetite, Appetite regulation, Habituation, Taste receptors       [MeSH] y PROP phenotype. En búsquedas subsecuentes se incluyeron artículos       previos y posteriores a la fecha de la búsqueda general (hasta mayo 2018).       RESULTS: Las preferencias por los sabores inician desde la gestación, por lo que       los niños que son expuestos a sabores dulces en etapas tempranas de la infancia       aumentan su riesgo de habituación a éstos. Asimismo, las experiencias hedónicas       dadas por la ingestión de alimentos y bebidas dulces refuerzan el consumo de       estos alimentos, lo que propicia la selección de productos o bebidas de sabor       dulce en etapas posteriores. Estas preferencias se han asociado con el desarrollo       de obesidad en los niños. Las variantes genéticas relacionadas con la percepción       del gusto también pueden contribuir a la selección de cierto tipo de alimentos.       Sin embargo, su relación con una mayor ingestión de energía, así como con un       mayor peso corporal, ha sido poco explorada y ha mostrado resultados       inconsistentes. CONCLUSIONS: Se requiere más evidencia para entender las       interacciones ambientales y genéticas de la percepción del gusto, a fin de       considerarlo un factor más en las intervenciones de política pública.
AB  - Childhood overweight and obesity are worldwide public health problems and risk       factors for chronic diseases. The presence of SNP in several genes has been       associated with the presence of obesity. A total of 580 children (8-13 years old)       from Queretaro, Mexico, participated in this cross-sectional study, which       evaluated the associations of rs9939609 (fat mass obesity-associated (FTO)),       rs17782313 (melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R)) and rs6548238 (transmembrane protein       18 (TMEM18)) SNP with obesity and metabolic risk factors. Overweight and obesity       prevalence was 19·8 and 19·1 %, respectively. FTO, MC4R and TMEM18 risk allele       frequency was 17, 9·8 and 89·5 %, respectively. A significant association between       FTO homozygous and MC4R heterozygous risk alleles and obesity was found (OR 3·9;       95 % CI 1·46, 10·22, and OR 2·1; 95 % CI 1·22, 3·71; respectively). The FTO       heterozygous subjects showed higher systolic and diastolic blood pressures,       compared with the homozygous for the ancestral allele subjects. These results       remain significant after considering adiposity as a covariate. The FTO and MC4R       genotypes were not significantly associated with total cholesterol,       HDL-cholesterol and insulin concentration. No association was found between       TMEM18 risk allele and obesity and/or metabolic alterations. Our results show       that, in addition to a higher BMI, there is also an association of the risk       genotype with blood pressure in the presence of the FTO risk genotype. The       possible presence of a risk genotype in obese children must be considered to       offer a more comprehensive therapeutic approach in order to delay and/or prevent       the development of chronic diseases.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to examine the relationship between caries       experience and obesity in Mexican schoolchildren aged 8-12 years. STUDY DESIGN:       This is a cross-sectional study. METHODS: This study was conducted on 522       schoolchildren selected from public schools. The prevalence of caries was       evaluated by applying the decayed, missing and filled teeth (DMFT) index and       ascertaining the subjects' dental caries experience from the mean DMFT value.       Socio-economic data were collected from the parents, with data on the children's       characteristics collected from them via a questionnaire. Their weight and height       were then measured and used to calculate their body mass index (BMI)-for-age       Z-score, which was then adjusted by age and sex. RESULTS: The prevalence of       caries was 79.9% (DMFT≥1) in permanent dentition. Of all children, 47.5% of them       brushed their teeth two or more times per day, and the prevalence of overweight       and obesity was 20.1% and 17.6%, respectively. The logistic regression model       showed that children with obesity (a >2 Z-score on the BMI-for-age growth chart)       were less likely to have dental caries (odds ratio [OR] = 0.53 [95% confidence       interval {CI}: 0.31-0.89]; P = 0.017) than children without obesity, with       schoolchildren who consume more sweets per day (OR = 1.65 [95% CI: 1.03-2.62];       P = 0.035) more likely to present caries than schoolchildren who consume fewer       sweets per day. CONCLUSION: Children with obesity are less likely to present       dental caries. Comprehensive strategies aimed at risk factors can be useful in       controlling nutritional status and improving oral health.
AB  - Background: Childhood overweight and obesity are among the major public health       problems worldwide. In Mexico, it has been reported in 2018 that 35.6% of       children between 5 and 11 years old were overweight or obese. Central obesity is       associated with the development of different complications, such as       cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). An important tool used to evaluate obesity is the       waist-to-height ratio (WHtR), and values higher than 0.5 suggest the existence of       cardiovascular risk (CVR). The aim of this study was to evaluate CVR by the WHtR       in school-age children from Yucatan, Mexico. Methods: This study included a       sample of school-age children between the ages of 10 and 13 years from public       schools in Yucatan, Mexico. Anthropometric parameters such as body weight,       height, body mass index z-score (zBMI), waist circumference, WHtR, and CVR were       evaluated. Results: A total of 2559 children with a median age of 12.1 ± 0.57       years old were evaluated. The classification by height z score showed that 26.8%       were of short height, 73.1% were of normal height, and 0.1% were of tall height.       The prevalence of body weight excess determined by zBMI was 48%. The prevalence       of normal weight was 44%, and the prevalence of body weight deficiencies was 8%.       The CVR determined by WHtR was 47.5%. In the population with obesity, 63.3% had       an increased risk of CVDs and 30.7% had a very high risk. Moreover, it was       observed that 13.2% of the population with normal weight had an increased risk of       CVDs. Conclusion: One out of two child 10 to 13 years of age is overweight or       obese as defined with zBMI in Mexico. According to WHtR, almost half of this       population is at increased CVR, while near two-third of child with obesity are at       high or very high CVR.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), the most common chronic       liver disease in adolescents, is a feature of metabolic syndrome (MetS). Obesity       and insulin resistance (IR) are risk factors for NAFLD, as well as       inflammation-related genetic markers. The relationship between metabolic or       inflammation-related genetic markers and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is not       fully understood. We examined the relationship of MetS, metabolic and       inflammation-related genetic markers with elevated ALT in adolescents. METHODS: A       total of 674 adolescents participated in a cross-sectional study in Guadalajara,       Mexico. Elevated ALT (>40 IU/L), a surrogate marker of NAFLD, and MetS       (International Diabetes Federation definition) were evaluated. Obesity, IR,       lipids, C-reactive protein (CRP) and genetic markers (TNFA-308G>A, CRP+1444C>T,       IL1RN and IL6-597/-572/-174 haplotype) were evaluated. Multivariate logistic       regression was performed. RESULTS: Elevated ALT was observed in 3% and 14.1%       (total and obese, respectively) of the adolescents. Obesity (odds ratio [OR],       5.86; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 1.16-25.89), insulin (OR, 8.51; 95% CI,       2.61-27.71), IR (OR, 9.10; 95% CI, 2.82-29.38), total cholesterol (TC) (OR, 3.67;       95% CI, 1.25-10.72), low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) (OR, 3.06; 95%       CI, 1.06-8.33), non-high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C) (OR, 3.88; 95%       CI, 1.27-11.90) and IL1RN (OR, 4.64; 95% CI, 1.10-19.53) were associated with       elevated ALT. Among males, ≥2 MetS criteria were associated with elevated ALT       (OR, 4.22; 95% CI, 1.14-15.71). CONCLUSIONS: Obesity, insulin, IR, high TC, high       LDL-C, high non-HDL-C and IL1RN polymorphism were associated with elevated ALT.       Among males, ≥2 MetS criteria were associated with elevated ALT. There is an       urgent need to reduce obesity and IR in adolescents to prevent NAFLD.
AB  - Introduction. Increase in body weight is a gradual process that usually begins in       childhood and in adolescence as a result of multiple interactions among       environmental and genetic factors. This study aimed to analyze the relationship       between copy number variants (CNVs) in five genes and four intergenic regions       with obesity in Mexican children. Methods. We studied 1423 children aged 6-12       years. Anthropometric measurements and blood levels of biochemical parameters       were obtained. Identification of CNVs was performed by real-time PCR. The effect       of CNVs on obesity or body composition was assessed using regression models       adjusted for age, gender, and family history of obesity. Results. Gains in copy       numbers of LEPR and NEGR1 were associated with decreased body mass index (BMI),       waist circumference (WC), and risk of abdominal obesity, whereas gain in ARHGEF4       and CPXCR1 and the intergenic regions 12q15c, 15q21.1a, and 22q11.21d and losses       in INS were associated with increased BMI and WC. Conclusion. Our results       indicate a possible contribution of CNVs in LEPR, NEGR1, ARHGEF4, and CPXCR1 and       the intergenic regions 12q15c, 15q21.1a, and 22q11.21d to the development of       obesity, particularly abdominal obesity in Mexican children.
AB  - INTRODUCTION: Down syndrome (DS) is associated with various congenital anomalies       and metabolic alterations, such as dyslipidemias, that can lead to cardiovascular       disease in adulthood. This study was designed to describe the lipid       concentrations and the frequency of dyslipidemias in children with DS. MATERIALS       AND METHODS: The sample included 386 patients, 52.4% male. The study was carried       out on children with DS, aged 2-18 years old, who were patients at the Mexican       National Institute of Pediatrics between May 2016 and June 2017. Their height and       weight were recorded, and their serum cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and       triglyceride levels were determined. RESULTS: Of the total patients included,       57.5% had some type of dyslipidemia, 32.6% isolated and 24.9% combined. The most       common alteration, considering both isolated and combined dyslipidemias, was low       HDL, in 45.9%, followed by hypertriglyceridemia, in 26.2%. Among those with       combined dyslipidemia, high TG with low HDL-c was the most common, in 17.9%. A       significant association was found between dyslipidemia and obesity, as well as       between dyslipidemia and central obesity. The percentiles of lipid values are       reported. CONCLUSION: The presence of an unfavorable lipid profile is common in       pediatric patients with Down syndrome, especially low HDL cholesterol and high       triglycerides.
AB  - BACKGROUND: In 2015, Mexico was the top country for childhood obesity. The       objective was to identify the association between physical activity and sedentary       lifestyle with the social and demographic characteristics of families of       schoolchildren in Arandas, Jalisco, Mexico. METHODS: In a cross-sectional study,       192 schoolchildren were randomly selected. Body mass index (BMI), active and       sedentary behaviors, and socio-demographic characteristics of families were       obtained. Logistic regression models with the included variables were       constructed. RESULTS: Males living in not-crowding houses [OR 6.12 (2.17-17.25),       p = 0.001], whose mothers were housewives [OR 2.44 (1.00, 5.94), p = 0.05],       practiced more physical activity. Active transport to school was more common in       schoolchildren whose fathers had lower income [OR 3.13 (1.27, 7.7), p = 0.013]       and employment as peasant or mason [OR 5.12 (1.13, 23.3), p = 0.034].       Schoolchildren of nuclear families spent more hours watching television [OR 2.69       (1.10, 6.58), p = 0.03]. The frequency of outdoor playing was higher in males       whose fathers had unstable employment [OR 2.93 (1.06, 8.1), p = 0.038] and low       education [OR 2.94 (0.96, 8.98), p = 0.059]. CONCLUSION: Families with lower       socioeconomic strata (less educated parents, unstable employment and family       overcrowding) are more associated with active activities that do not require       active economic spending.
AB  - BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Childhood obesity is considered the main risk factor       for the development of metabolic syndrome (MetS) during childhood, adolescence       and adulthood. This study aimed to determine the prevalence of MetS components       and its main defining combinations in a sample of school children with and       without obesity. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 225 children aged 6-12 years,       106 obese and 119 with normal weight were included. MetS was defined by the       presence of 3 or more of the following: obesity as a body mass index ≥ 95th       percentile, fasting glucose ≥ 100 mg/dL, triglycerides ≥ 150 mg/dL, high density       lipoproteins cholesterol (HDL-c)<40 mg/dL and systolic and diastolic blood       pressure ≥ 95th percentile. RESULTS: We found MetS components in both groups.       Most frequent abnormalities in the obese group included increased levels of       HDL-c, triglycerides, fasting glucose and total cholesterol, while increased       levels of glucose and total cholesterol, and lower HDL-c levels predominated in       the normal weight group. The prevalence of MetS in the obese group was 44.3% and,       in normal weight children, it was 0.84%. The 3 main components that defined the       MetS in the obese group were obesity/triglycerides/HDL-c (34.0%),       obesity/glucose/triglycerides/HDL-c (29.8%) and obesity/glucose/HDL-c (14.9%),       while the only combination observed in the normal weight group was       glucose/HDL-c/triglycerides. CONCLUSION: A percentage of 44.3 of obese school       children had MetS, and dyslipidemia showed to be strong determinants of MetS.       Although the prevalence of MetS was low in children with normal weight, one third       of them showed one of the components of MetS.
AB  - The most common tools used to screen for abdominal obesity are waist       circumference (WC) and waist-to-height ratio (WHtR); the latter may represent a       more suitable tool for the general non-professional population. The objective of       this study was to evaluate the association of WHtR, WC, and body mass index with       lipidic and non-lipidic cardio-metabolic risk factors and the prediction       capability of each adiposity indicator in a sample of school-aged Mexican       children. Overall, 125 children aged 6 to 12 years were analyzed. Anthropometric,       biochemical, and dietary parameters were assessed. Receiving operating       characteristic (ROC) analysis and univariate and multivariate linear and logistic       regression analyses were performed. All the three adiposity indicators showed       significant areas under the ROC curve (AURC) greater than 0.68 for high       low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c), triglycerides, and atherogenic index       of plasma, and low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-c). A significant       increased risk of having LDL-c ≥ 3.4 mmol/L was observed among children with WHtR       ≥ 0.5 as compared to those with WHtR < 0.5 (odds ratio, OR: 2.82; 95% confidence       interval, CI: 0.75⁻7.68; p = 0.003). Fasting plasma glucose was not associated       with any of the adiposity parameters. WHtR performed similarly to WC and z-BMI in       predicting lipidic cardio-metabolic risk factors; however, a WHtR ≥ 0.5 was       superior in detecting an increased risk of elevated LDL-c.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) is a risk factor       for obesity. In Mexico, SSBs are widely available and consumed daily by       adolescents. OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to estimate the indirect       association between store density (including grocery, convenience, non-alcoholic       beverage stores and supermarkets) and overweight or obesity (OW/O) among Mexican       adolescents, using SSB consumption as a mediator. METHODS: We used       cross-sectional data on adolescent SSB consumption, weight status (body mass       index for age [BMI for age]), physical activity, screen time and sociodemographic       factors from the 2016 Mexican Midway National Health and Nutrition Survey       (ENSANUT MC 2016). The National Statistical Directory of Economic Units provided       information on stores selling SSBs. We estimated structural equations models to       test associations between store density and OW/O, using SSB consumption as a       mediator. RESULTS: We found a direct positive association between store density       and SSB intake in adolescents (β =1.229), including density of supermarkets       (β = 132.07), grocery stores (β = 1.170) and non-alcoholic beverage stores       (β = 1.537). No significant association was observed for convenience stores.       Direct association between store density and OW/O was strongest for supermarket       density (β = 0.426). In addition, SSB intake was significantly associated with       OW/O (p = 0.033). No significant indirect association between density of any       store and OW/O was found. CONCLUSIONS: Store density was directly associated with       SSB consumption but not indirectly associated with OW/O mediated by SSB. Further       research on food environment is required in order to design evidence-based       strategies aimed at reducing SSB intake and OW/O in adolescents.
AB  - This study examined the association between intestinal lactobacilli and obesity       dependent on dietary patterns in children. A cross-sectional study was conducted       including 1111 children, 6-12 years old. Obesity was determined according to the       WHO cut-off points. Diet information from a Food Frequency Questionnaire       identified three dietary patterns. Lactobacillus sp. were determined by a       real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The consumption of complex       carbohydrates and a high abundance of L. paracasei were associated with a lower       risk of obesity (0.35, Confidence Interval 95% 0.19-0.65). The same happened with       a medium consumption of fats and a medium abundance of L. paracasei (0.43, CI95%       0.24-0.78). In contrast, an increased risk of obesity is observed with a medium       and high consumption of simple carbohydrates (2.37, CI95% 1.29-4.34 and 2.52,       CI95% 1.36-4.66, respectively, p-trend<0.05), and low consumption of complex       carbohydrates (2.49, CI95% 1.35-4.58), in the presence of a high relative       abundance of L. reuteri. A high relative abundance of L. paracasei decreased the       risk of obesity, even when high-fat and simple carbohydrate diets were consumed;       while a high relative abundance of L. reuteri was associated with a greater       possibility of obesity with these types of diets. Our results provide evidence of       diet implication in metabolism regulators like lactobacilli. This is helpful in       strategies development to promote healthy diets during early stages of life.
AB  - OBJECTIVES: Genetic variation of the fat mass and obesity associated gene (FTO)       has been identified as a risk factor for obesity and obesity traits. Distribution       of FTO single nutleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs1421085T>C, rs9939609T>A,       rs8057044G>A and copy number variation (CNV) was evaluated in association with       childhood obesity or overweight status in children with Mayan ethnicity. METHODS:       We included 318 school-aged children with obesity or overweight status (body mass       index [BMI]: >85th percentile) and 303 children with normal weight (BMI:       15th-85th percentile). Genotyping was performed using real-time polymerase chain       reaction (RT-PCR) with TaqMan probes. The cross-sectional study was carried out       using univariate and multivariate logistic regression models adjusted for gender.       RESULTS: FTO-SNP rs1421085 showed significant differences between children with       obesity and children with normal weight for the heterozygous genotype (P = 0.003)       and for allele frequencies (P = 0.023). Adjusting by gender, significant       differences were found in frequencies of the hetezygous genotype of SNPs       rs9939609 (P = 0.023) and rs1421085 (P = 0.003) as well as in allele frequencies       (P = 0.042 and P = 0.013, respectively) between girls with obesity and girls       without obesity. In contrast, SNP rs8057044 was significantly different only       between heterozygous overweight versus normal weight boys (P = 0.035) and for the       allele frequency of rs8057044 (P = 0.021). The mean relative CNV was       significantly higher in male overweight children than in boys with normal weight       (P = 0.000). CONCLUSIONS: The FTO SNP rs1421085 is a genetic factor associated       with obesity in Mayan school-aged children. FTO SNPs rs1421085 and rs9939609       affect genetic susceptibility for obesity only in girls, whereas, SNP rs8057044       and CNV are associated with overweight status only in boys.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Mexico is experiencing an epidemic of childhood obesity and       overweight, the factors that determine type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular       diseases. Even though variants in genes such as MC4R, LEP, LEPR, and FTO have       been associated with the risk of obesity, in Mexico the level of miscegenation is       heterogeneous, so this risk must be measured as genetic ancestry. This study       aimed at evaluating the association between common SNPs in FTO and MC4R genes in       Mexican children with Amerindian, mestizo and predominance European ancestry.       METHODS: Anthropometric data and fasting blood samples were collected from 718       unrelated Mexican school children aged 4-13 years old. Variants in the FTO, MC4R,       LEP, LEPR genes and 15 ancestry informative markers (AIMs), were genotyped using       allelic discrimination assays. RESULTS: High triglycerides and low cholesterol       HDL were the most frequent metabolic alterations. The prevalence of minor allele       frequency of polymorphism rs8050136, rs9939609, and rs3751812 in the FTO gene;       and rs17782313 of MC4R gene were found to be significantly higher among Mexican       children with a predominance of European ancestry (EA) compared to native Mexican       children (Amerindian predominance), X(2) test, p < 0.05. The FTO (rs8050136,       rs9939609) and MC4R (rs17782313) genotypes also were significantly associated       with obesity (BMI > 2Z) in boys (OR=1.89, P=0.04, OR=3.3, P=0.006 OR=3.11,       p=0.04, respectively). Children with AA genotype (minor) of rs8050136 and       rs9939609 SNPs have higher triglycerides in relation to native ancestral       genotypes. CONCLUSION: Risk variants in the FTO and MC4R genes had a higher       frequency in children with EA compared with Amerindian predominance children,       showing that miscegenation is associated with the frequency of obesity-related       genotypes.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Low-grade inflammation is the link between obesity and insulin       resistance. Because physiologic insulin resistance occurs at puberty, obese       pubertal children are at higher risk for insulin resistance. Excessive diets in       refined carbohydrates and saturated fats are risk factors for insulin resistance,       but calcium, magnesium, vitamin-D, and the omega-3 fatty acids likely protect       against inflammation and insulin resistance. OBJECTIVE: To analyze interactions       among dietary saturated fat, refined carbohydrates, calcium, magnesium, vitamin       D, and omega-3 fatty acids on the risk of inflammation and insulin resistance in       a sample of prepubertal and pubertal children. METHODS: A sample of 229 children       from Mexico City was analyzed in a cross-sectional design. Anthropometric       measurements, 24 h recall questionnaires, and blood samples were obtained. Serum       insulin, glucose, calcium, magnesium, 25-OHD3, C-reactive protein, leptin,       adiponectin, and erythrocytes fatty acids were measured. Parametric and       nonparametric statistics were used for analysis. RESULTS: While mean       macronutrients intake was excessive, micronutrients intake was deficient (P <       0.01). Inflammation determinants were central obesity and magnesium-deficient       diets. Determinants of insulin resistance were carbohydrates intake and       circulating magnesium and adiponectin. CONCLUSIONS: Magnesium-deficient diets are       determinants of inflammation, while high intake of refined carbohydrates is a       risk factor for insulin resistance, independently of central adiposity.
AB  - BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Few studies in Latin American paediatric populations have       differentiated fat deposits in specific areas, such as intra-abdominal fat (IAF)       and subcutaneous abdominal fat (SAF). Research in diverse populations is needed,       as patterns of fat accumulation vary by ethnicity. The aim of this study was to       determine whether IAF and/or SAF are related to cardiometabolic risk factors,       independent of total body fat (TBF), in a group of Mexican schoolchildren.       SUBJECTS/METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted in Mexico City with 94       children aged between 5 and 11 years. IAF and SAF were assessed by magnetic       resonance using two different estimation methods: (a) at the midpoint of lumbar       vertebras 4 and 5 (L4-L5) and (b) the sum of the areas of four slices (L1-L2,       L2-L3, L3-L4 and L4-L5, which will be referred to as 'total' IAF and SAF). TBF       was measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. The following cardiometabolic       risk factors were assessed: total cholesterol, low-density       lipoprotein-cholesterol, triglycerides, glucose, insulin, high-density       lipoprotein-cholesterol, blood pressure, insulin resistance, number of risk       factors and metabolic syndrome score. RESULTS: After adjusting for sex, age and       TBF, total SAF was related to the number of cardiometabolic risk factors and       metabolic syndrome score. Although IAF at L4-L5 was also related to the number of       cardiometabolic risk factors, there was evidence of collinearity with TBF.       CONCLUSIONS: In this sample of Mexican schoolchildren, TBF and SAF, but not IAF,       were associated with higher cardiometabolic risk.
AB  - High concentrations of carotenoids are protective against cardiometabolic risk       traits (CMTs) in adults and children. We recently showed in non-diabetic Mexican       American (MA) children that serum α-carotene and β-carotene are inversely       correlated with obesity measures and triglycerides and positively with HDL       cholesterol and that they were under strong genetic influences. Additionally, we       previously described a Pediatric Metabolic Index (PMI) that helps in the       identification of children who are at risk for cardiometabolic diseases. Here, we       quantified serum lycopene and β-cryptoxanthin concentrations in approximately 580       children from MA families using an ultraperformance liquid       chromatography-photodiode array and determined their heritabilities and       correlations with CMTs. Using response surface methodology (RSM), we determined       two-way interactions of carotenoids and PMI on Matsuda insulin sensitivity index       (ISI). The concentrations of lycopene and β-cryptoxanthin were highly heritable       [h(2) = 0.98, P = 7 × 10(-18) and h(2) = 0.58, P = 1 × 10(-7)]. We found       significant (P ≤ 0.05) negative phenotypic correlations between β-cryptoxanthin       and five CMTs: body mass index (- 0.22), waist circumference (- 0.25),       triglycerides (- 0.18), fat mass (- 0.23), fasting glucose (- 0.09), and positive       correlations with HDL cholesterol (0.29). In contrast, lycopene only showed a       significant negative correlation with fasting glucose (- 0.08) and a positive       correlation with HDL cholesterol (0.18). Importantly, we found that common       genetic influences significantly contributed to the observed phenotypic       correlations. RSM showed that increased serum concentrations of α- and       β-carotenoids rather than that of β-cryptoxanthin or lycopene had maximal effects       on ISI. In summary, our findings suggest that the serum carotenoids are under       strong additive genetic influences and may have differential effects on       susceptibility to CMTs in children.
AB  - OBJECTIVES: Childhood obesity remains a problem among Latino children in the       United States. Acculturation to an American diet and sedentary lifestyle may be       causative factors. The research purpose was to assess child growth status,       including sitting height, in relation to acculturation among Mexican and       Mexican-American children. METHODS: Anthropometric measures of weight, height,       and sitting height were taken in a cross-sectional survey of Mexican and       Mexican-American elementary school children (N = 484) in Phoenix, Arizona.       Height-for-age (HAZ), weight-for-age (WAZ), and body mass index (BMI) Z-scores       were calculated based on the Centers for Disease Control 2000 growth reference.       Sitting height Z-scores (SHZ) were determined from the NHANES III reference       values. Questions about language usage were asked of the children as a proxy for       acculturation. Differences in growth measures and acculturation between those       born in the United States or Mexico were evaluated by chi-square or t-tests.       RESULTS: The mean HAZ value (-0.23) was close to the reference median. There were       no significant differences in HAZ or SHZ by birth country or gender. WAZ values       for boys were significantly higher than for girls. More girls (64%) than boys       (54%) had normal BMIs. More Mexican-born boys (28%) were obese than Mexican-born       girls (17%; P = 0.026) in comparison to the US-born boys (31%) and girls (24%; P       = n.s.). Acculturation scale score and male gender predicted a small percentage       of the variation in BMIZ. CONCLUSIONS: Environmental and cultural factors that       promote obesity among low-income Mexican and Mexican-American children are       similar regardless of birth country but boys may be at greater risk of obesity       than girls.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: Obesity before pregnancy is associated with a greater risk for the       offspring to develop obesity and diabetes in childhood and adulthood. The aim of       the present study was to determine the association between maternal overweight or       obesity before pregnancy and newborn oxidative stress (OS). METHODS: Seventy-two       mother-child pairs were divided according to the pre-gestational body mass index       (BMI) of the mothers as follows: eutrophic (n = 21), overweight (n = 32), and       obese (n = 19). Malondialdehyde (MDA) and nitric oxide (NO) were measured in the       plasma of a blood sample from the newborn's umbilical cord. RESULTS: The MDA       levels of newborns increased with maternal BMI (P = 0.001), as did the levels of       NO (P = 0.019). There was a direct correlation between MDA and NO levels in each       of the three groups (eutrophic: R(2)  = 0.59, P < 0.001; overweight: R(2)        = 0.45, P < 0.001; and obese: R(2)  = 0.26, P = 0.024). CONCLUSIONS: Maternal       overweight and obesity before pregnancy are associated with increased OS in the       offspring.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Obese youth with prediabetes are at increased risk for premature       morbidity and mortality through multiple mechanisms, including increased systemic       inflammation. GlycA is a novel measure of systemic inflammation that predicts       type II diabetes, cardiovascular events, and all-cause mortality in adults.       OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the present study was to examine changes in GlycA after       lifestyle intervention among obese, prediabetic Latino youth. METHODS: Obese,       prediabetic Latino youth (n = 27; 15.5 ± 1.1 years, 13 males/14 females)       completed a 12-week lifestyle intervention that included weekly nutrition       education and 3 d/wk of moderate to vigorous physical activity. Prediabetes was       characterized by an expanded definition of impaired glucose tolerance, using       2-hour glucose ≥120 mg/dL after an oral glucose tolerance test. GlycA was       assessed at baseline and 12 weeks using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.       RESULTS: After the lifestyle intervention, GlycA was significantly reduced       (445.3 ± 51.3 μmol/L to 419.0 ± 50.0 μmol/L, P = .01) (mean ± standard       deviation). Additional improvements were observed in multiple cardiovascular risk       factors, including body mass index (BMI; 34.8 ± 5.0 kg/m(2) to       34.0 ± 5.1 kg/m(2), P < .001), total cholesterol (154.1 ± 30.3 mg/dL to       143.3 ± 29.1 mg/dL, P = .003), and 2-hour glucose (141.0 ± 13.2 mg/dL to       115.9 ± 31.4 mg/dL, P < .001). Decreases in GlycA were associated with decreases       in 2-hour glucose (r = 0.49, P = .008) and BMI (r = 0.41, P = .03). CONCLUSION:       These data are consistent with the hypothesis that lifestyle intervention might       improve GlycA levels in obese, prediabetic adolescent Latinos, but randomized       trial evidence is needed. Healthy lifestyle modifications among high-risk youth       may decrease future risk of cardiometabolic disease through reducing systemic       inflammation, in addition to improving traditional cardiovascular risk factors.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: Evaluate association of dietary patterns with metabolic syndrome       (MetS) and metabolic markers. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 654 adolescents from       Guadalajara, Jalisco, participated in a cross-sectional study. Diet was evaluated       using a food frequency questionnaire; 24 food groups were integrated, and dietary       patterns were derived using cluster analysis. MetS was defined according to       International Diabetes Federation (IDF), Cook and colleagues, Ford and       colleagues, and de Ferranti and colleagues criteria. RESULTS: Dietary patterns       identified were: "DP1", "DP2", and "DP3". Among males, "DP3" was associated with       MetS (Cook and collaborators) (OR, 12.14; 95%CI, 1.66-89.05),       hypertriglyceridemia (OR, 3.89; 95%CI, 1.01-15.07), and insulin resistance (OR,       6.66; 95%CI, 1.12-39.70). "DP2" was associated with abdominal obesity (OR, 5.11;       95%CI, 1.57-16.66). CONCLUSIONS: "DP3" entertained a greater risk of MetS,       hypertriglyceridemia, and insulin resistance, while "DP2" possessed a greater       risk of abdominal obesity among adolescent males.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The prevalence of chronic diseases (CDs) in the pediatric population       has increased due to technological advances that decrease mortality and increase       survival. AIM OF THE STUDY: To compare the frequency of cardiometabolic factors       (CFs) among pediatric patients with CDs with those among children with obesity       and overweight without CDs. METHODS: This study was a cross-sectional study.       Pediatric patients from 6-17 years of age were included. A total of 333 patients       with CD were studied, and of these patients, 77 had difficult-to-control       epilepsy, 183 had chronic kidney disease (CKD), and 73 underwent kidney       transplants; in addition, a comparison group was included, consisting of 286       overweight and obese children without any other pathologies. We performed       anthropometry, blood pressure, glucose, insulin, and lipid profiling on all of       the patients. Statistical analysis was conducted as follows: Chi(2) tests were       used to compare the CFs between the groups. RESULTS: We included 619 patients       from 6-17 years old. Patients with CDs had a low frequency of obesity (12.4%) but       a high frequency of the remaining CFs. Hypertriglyceridemia (65%),       hypoalphalipoproteinemia (49%) and systemic arterial hypertension (46.5%) were       the most common CFs, particularly among subjects with CKD and kidney       transplantation. When comparing the frequencies of these CFs with those in the       obesity/overweight group, hypertriglyceridemia (p <0.05) was more common in       patients with CDs. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with CDs, dyslipidemia, hypertension,       and hyperglycemia occur at frequencies that are the same as or higher than those       in overweight/obese children, but when the CD patients are overweight/obese, it       increases their frequency.
AB  - OBJECTIVES: To evaluate children's risk of being overweight associated with       maternal underestimation of weight status and health behaviors. RESULTS: One       hundred forty mother-child dyads were included. Children whose weight status was       underestimated by their mothers were at greater risks of being overweight       compared to those whose weigh status was correctly perceived (adjusted OR 2.31,       95% CI 1.11-4.81). Less television viewing time was associated with a 63% reduced       risk of being overweight (adjusted OR .37, 95% CI .17-.83). CONCLUSIONS: Maternal       underestimation of weight status was common among overweight and normal-weight       children, and it was associated with an increased children's risk of being       overweight.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Overweight/obesity (OW/OB) coexists in mother-child dyads. However, a       dearth of evidence on the factors associated with this phenomenon calls for       research. OBJECTIVE: To analyze the association of sociodemographic factors with       OW/OB in a sample of 260 Maya mother-child dyads from Yucatan, Mexico. METHODS:       During 2011 to 2014, we measured height and weight in children and their mothers       and calculated their body mass index (BMI). The OW/OB cutoff points were defined,       for mothers, as having a BMI >25 kg/m(2) and, for children, as having a       BMI-for-age >2 standard deviation of the World Health Organization references.       Mother-child dyads were grouped according to their BMI status: (1) normal weight       mother and child, (2) normal weight mother and OW/OB child, (3) OW/OB mother and       normal weight child, and (4) OW/OB mother and child. A multinomial logistic       regression model was used to analyze the interrelationships among BMI status in       mother-child dyads, household size, and parental education. RESULTS:       Overweight/obesity coexisted in 40% of dyads. Compared to normal weight dyads       (1), each unit increase in household size and in years of maternal education       decreased the risks of the coexistence of OW/OB in mother-child dyads (odds ratio       [OR] = 0.72, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.55-0.94, P = .015; OR = 0.70, 95% CI       0.52-0.94, P = .019, respectively). Conversely, each year increase in paternal       education increased the risk for OW/OB in dyads (OR = 1.47, 95% CI 1.08-1.99, P =       .015). CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that household size and parental education       contribute to shape BMI-based nutritional status in this sample of mother-child       dyads.
AB  - The purpose was to compare maternal perceptions, feeding practices, and       overweight status of children in immigrant households in California (US) with a       cohort in Guanajuato, Mexico (MX). In 2006, staff interviewed mothers and weighed       and measured their children, 1-6 years (US: n = 95 and MX: n = 200). Prevalence       of overweight [body mass index z-score (BMIZ) >1.0 and <1.65] and obesity (BMIZ >       1.65) was 21.1 and 28.4% in the US respectively, compared to 11.5 and 12.9% in MX       (p < 0.001). No differences were observed in maternal ability to identify       correctly the child's weight status or ever being told the child was overweight.       US children ate away from home more often (p < 0.0001), had fewer family meals (p       < 0.0001), and played outdoors less often than MX children (p < 0.0002). Further       analyses should examine how differences in eating and activity patterns explain       the disparity in childhood obesity across the countries.
AB  - Some comorbidities are risk factors for severe coronavirus disease (Covid-19) but       it is unknown whether some increase susceptibility to Covid-19 in children. In       this Mexican case-control study, contact with patients with Covid-19, or having       obesity, or having diabetes, or hypertension or been immunosuppressed       independently increased the risk for Covid-19 in the whole sample analysis.       However, only contact history and obesity remained statistically significant in       the separated analysis of girls and boys. The results suggest that obesity is not       only associated with severe disease but also increases risk for Covid-19.       Contrary to findings in adults, no difference between cases and controls was       found for gender, presence of pneumonia or surrogates of severe disease including       admission to intensive care unit, tracheal intubation or whether patient had       died. This indicates that Covid-19 is less severe in children than adults. Future       research is needed to establish the mechanisms involved in obesity and Covid-19       in children.
AB  - Excessive weight gain and obesity are major public health concerns. Childhood       obesity is growing at an alarming rate. Polymorphisms in the Calpain-10 gene and       the reduced expression of this gene in muscle cells and adipocytes have been       associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus in several       populations. In the present study, we explored the contribution of Calpain-10 in       the development of metabolic impairment in childhood. We evaluated the presence       of risk polymorphisms in the CAPN10 gene (SNP-44, SNP-43, InDel-19 and SNP-63)       and the associated changes in the Calpain-10 mRNA levels in a pediatric       population. A total of 161 Mexican children between 4 and 18 years old were       included in this study. This population was classified into three groups       according to international growth references: healthy weight (HW), overweight       (OW) and obese (OB). Association studies of the anthropometric data, clinical       values, genotyping and expression assays showed a decrease in the Calpain-10 mRNA       and protein expression in the OW and OB groups with respect to the HW group. This       decrease in the Calpain-10 mRNA expression was more evident in individuals       homozygous for SNP-44 (T/T) and InDel-19 (3/3), alone (p<0.001 and p=0.015,       respectively) or in combination (p=0.017). These polymorphisms were also       associated with elevated BMI, weight percentiles, z-scores, waist circumferences,       fasting glucose levels and beta cell functions in the OW and OB groups (p<0.05).       Moreover, our results indicate a statistically significant decrease in the       expression of the 75-kDa Calpain-10 isoform in the OW+OB group. The presence of       polymorphisms and alterations in the expression of the CAPN10 gene at early ages       might result in metabolic impairment in adulthood and should be further       investigated.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Obesity in the prepuberal stage has been directly associated with       slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE). Serum insulin level increases in the       prepuberal and adolescence stage, to a greater extent in the obese population.       The main objective of this article was to analyze the relationship between       insulin levels and SCFE. METHODS: A case-control study was conducted between       January 2018 and April 2019. The study group was formed with patients with SCFE       and the control group with patients from the pediatric obesity clinic of our       hospital selected during their initial evaluation. None were being treated for       obesity. Anthropometric measurements of size, weight, waist circumference, and       blood pressure were taken. Body mass index (BMI) and waist-height index of all       patients were calculated. According to BMI for age, they were classified as       normal, overweight, or obese. Serum determinations of glucose, insulin, glycated       hemoglobin, lipid profile, and complete blood count were analyzed. Insulin       resistance was diagnosed with Homeostatic Model Assessment (HOMA) >3. Insulin       levels >13 U/mL for girls and >17 U/mL for boys were considered as       hyperinsulinemia. RESULTS: We studied 14 patients with SCFE and 23 in the control       group. The mean age and BMI in both groups were similar. The elevation of serum       insulin was significantly higher in the SCFE group (P=0.001) as was HOMA       (P=0.005). Triglycerides and very-low-density lipoprotein were higher in the SCFE       group (P=0.037 and 0.009, respectively). Glycemia, glycated hemoglobin, total       cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein, low-density lipoprotein, and neutrophils       showed no significant difference. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with SCFE showed elevated       levels of insulin, HOMA, triglycerides, and very-low-density lipoprotein, even       higher than the control group. Our study demonstrates a significant association       between abnormally high serum insulin levels and SCFE. The known effects of       insulin on growth cartilage may explain the physeal mechanical insufficiency to       support the abnormally high or repetitive loads in accelerated growth stages that       lead to SCFE. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level III-case-control, prognostic study.
AB  - CONTEXT: Several factors contribute to the increase in breast cancer (BC)       incidence, such as lifetime exposure to estrogen, early menarche and older ages       at first birth, menopause, and the increased prevalence of postmenopausal       obesity. In fact, there is an association between an increased BC risk and       elevated estrogen levels, which may be involved in carcinogenesis via the       estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) encoded by the ESR1 gene. Interestingly, there is       an antagonistic relationship between ERα and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)       in BC cells. AIMS: Herein, we explore the combined effects of the ESR1 (XbaI,       PvuII) and AhR polymorphisms on BC development in Mexican women according to       their menopausal status. SETTINGS AND DESIGN: Investigation was performed using a       cases and controls design. SUBJECTS AND METHODS: In a group of 96 cases diagnosed       with BC and 111 healthy women, the single-nucleotide polymorphisms ESR1 (XbaI,       PvuII) and AhR gene were identified by qPCR. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS USED:       Chi-square test or Fisher's exact test were used. Statistical analyses were       conducted using the STATA statistical package (Version 10.1, STATA Corp., College       Station, TX, USA). RESULTS: The G/G XbaI genotype was more prevalent in the cases       than in the controls (P = 0.008). Moreover, Mexican women carrying the XbaI (wild       type [WT]/G or G/G) ESR1 genotype have higher risk (12.26-fold) for developing       postmenopausal BC than individuals carrying the WT/WT genotype. CONCLUSIONS: The       presence of the G/G genotype of XbaI may be considered a susceptibility allele in       Mexican women. Due to increased postmenopausal BC risk, the XbaI (WT/G or G/G)       alleles may be used as a postmenopausal predictive factor for BC in Mexican       women.
AB  - The impact of nutritional status at diagnosis of childhood acute lymphoblastic       leukemia (ALL) on survival rates was assessed in a Hispanic cohort. Children       <16 years with newly diagnosed ALL-B from 2011 to 2019 were studied. Overweight       and obesity were classified by body mass index (BMI) and Z-score according to WHO       and CDC criteria. BMI, weight percentiles for age and Z-Score were assessed using       the WHO Anthro (0-5 years) and AnthroPlus (5-19 years) programs. Cox model was       used to estimate risk factors for relapse and death; differences between groups       were assessed with Student's T test for parametric and Mann-Whitney U test for       non-parametric variables. Disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS)       were determined by the Kaplan-Meier method, calculating time, status, cumulative       survival and standard error with a 95% confidence interval. Equal data       distribution was estimated with the log-rank test. One-hundred and seventy-two       B-ALL children were studied. The overweight-obese group had a non-significant       lower DFS (CDC: 54% vs. 60%, p = 0.80; WHO: 57% vs. 64%, p = 0.89) and OS rate       (CDC:76% vs. 82%, p = 0.38; WHO:65% vs. 81%, p = 0.13). An association between       nutritional status determined by CDC and WHO criteria at diagnosis of B-cell ALL       and survival rates was not documented.
AB  - The objective of this study was to estimate the prevalence and correlations of       components of the metabolic syndrome (MetS) using the International Diabetes       Federation (IDF) pediatric definition in a cross-sectional study of 215       overweight/obese Mexican children aged 6 to 12. There are no previous studies of       this kind in Mexican children. Clinical, anthropometric, and laboratory       measurements were performed. The prevalence of MetS using the pediatric IDF       criteria was 6.7% (95% confidence interval, 4.0-11.1). A higher proportion of       children in the younger age group had waist circumference above the cutoff, while       a higher proportion in the older age group had hyperglycemia. Children with MetS       had higher percentages of body fat, body mass index, total cholesterol, and       low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Increased triglycerides, decreased       high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and waist circumference were most highly       associated with MetS. This has significant implications for public health.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Overweight and obesity in schoolchildren are a major public health       problem in Mexico. The objective of this study was to demonstrate the association       of appetitive traits with the presence of obesity and identify gender differences       in children attending a university hospital. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was       conducted on 176 children with obesity and 175 children with normal weight in the       outpatient clinic of the Nuevo Hospital Civil de Guadalajara. The body mass index       (BMI) of the participants was calculated. The parents completed the Children's       Eating Behaviour Questionnaire to measure eight appetitive traits. The mean       appetitive trait scores were compared between children with obesity and normal       weight, and between genders. Statistical analysis was performed using Student's       t-tests for independent samples and regression analysis between appetite traits       and BMI Z-scores. RESULTS: The mean food responsiveness score (or food onset       appetitive trait) was higher in children with obesity (p < 0.001), while the mean       satiety responsiveness (or food offset trait) was higher in children with normal       weight (p < 0.001). Normal weight males showed higher scores for Food       responsiveness, Emotional over-eating, and Desire to drink (p < 0.05).       CONCLUSIONS: Children with obesity show appetitive traits that could lead to       higher food consumption. Normal weight males showed appetitive traits that could       represent a risk of developing obesity.
AB  - We aimed to estimate the population fraction of poor early child health and       developmental outcomes attributable to maternal depressive symptoms (DS)       contrasting it between low- and middle/high-income households. We used a       nationally representative probabilistic sample of 4240 children younger than       5 years old and their mothers, derived from the Mexican National Health and       Nutrition Survey Data (ENSANUT 2012). Complex survey design, sampling, and       analytic weights were taken into account in analyses. DS was measured by CESD-7.       Child outcomes were as follows: breastfeeding, attending well-child check-ups,       respiratory disease, diarrhea and general health problems, immunization,       accidents, growth, obesity, and food insecurity. Prevalence of DS among mothers       was 21.36%. In low-SES households, DS was associated with higher risk of never       being breastfed (RR = 1.77; p < .05), health problems (RR = 1.37; p < .05), acute       respiratory disease (RR = 1.51; p < .05), accidents requiring child       hospitalization (RR = 2.16; p < .01), and moderate or severe food insecurity       (RR = 1.58; p < .001). In medium- or high-SES households, DS was associated with       higher risk of never attending a developmental check-up (RR = 2.14; p < .05) and       moderate or severe food insecurity (RR = 1.75; p < .01). Population risks       attributable to DS ranged from 2.30 to 17.45%. Prevention of DS could lead to       reduction of problematic early childhood outcomes in both low and medium/high       SES.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a multifactorial disease caused by a complex       interplay between environmental risk factors and genetic predisposition. To date,       a total of 10 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) have been associated with       pediatric-onset T2D in Mexicans, with a small individual effect size. A genetic       risk score (GRS) that combines these SNPs could serve as a predictor of the risk       for pediatric-onset T2D. OBJECTIVE: To assess the clinical utility of a GRS that       combines 10 SNPs to improve risk prediction of pediatric-onset T2D in Mexicans.       METHODS: This case-control study included 97 individuals with pediatric-onset T2D       and 84 controls below 18 years old without T2D. Information regarding family       history of T2D, demographics, perinatal risk factors, anthropometric       measurements, biochemical variables, lifestyle, and fitness scores were then       obtained. Moreover, 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously       associated with pediatric-onset T2D in Mexicans were genotyped. The GRS was       calculated by summing the 10 risk alleles. Pediatric-onset T2D risk variance was       assessed using multivariable logistic regression models and the area under the       receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). RESULTS: The body mass index       Z-score (Z-BMI) [odds ratio (OR) = 1.7; p = 0.009] and maternal history of T2D       (OR = 7.1; p < 0.001) were found to be independently associated with       pediatric-onset T2D. No association with other clinical risk factors was       observed. The GRS also showed a significant association with pediatric-onset T2D       (OR = 1.3 per risk allele; p = 0.006). The GRS, clinical risk factors, and GRS       plus clinical risk factors had an AUC of 0.66 (95% CI 0.56-0.75), 0.72 (95% CI       0.62-0.81), and 0.78 (95% CI 0.70-0.87), respectively (p < 0.01). CONCLUSION: The       GRS based on 10 SNPs was associated with pediatric-onset T2D in Mexicans and       improved its prediction with modest significance. However, clinical factors, such       the Z-BMI and family history of T2D, continue to have the highest predictive       utility in this population.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Obesity during childhood is a risk factor for developing       cardiovascular diseases during adulthood. AIM: To measure insulin and glucose       levels and parameters of insulin resistance in obese, overweight and normal       weight Mexican children. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Comparative study of 21 obese       children with a body mass index (BMI) over percentile 95, aged 10 ± 1 years (10       males), 14 children aged 10 ± 2 (7 males) with a BMI between percentiles 85 and       94 and 16 children aged 9 ± 2 years (3 males) with a body mass index between       percentiles 10 and 84. Body weight, blood pressure and waist circumference were       measured and a blood sample was obtained to measure fasting glucose and insulin       levels. Homeostasis model of insulin resistance (HOMA) and quantitative insulin       sensitivity check index (QUICKI) were calculated. RESULTS: Among obese,       overweight and normal weight children, insulin levels were 14.9 (95% CI       10.90-18.99), 7.20 (CI 5.12-9.28) and 4.73 (CI 95% 1.92-7.53) uU/ml,       respectively. The figures for HOMA were 3.16 (95% CI 2.20-4.12), 1.49 (95% CI       1.03-1.94) and 0.97 (95% CI 0.35-1.60), respectively. The figures for QUICKI were       0.331 (95% CI 0.319-0.343), 0.371 (95% CI 0.349-0.393) and 0.419 (95% CI       0.391-0.446), respectively. Compared to their normal weight counterparts, the       risk of obese children and those with a waist circumference over percentile 90 of       having a HOMA over 3.16 was 17 and 10 times higher, respectively. BMI correlated       better than waist circumference with insulin levels. CONCLUSIONS: Obese children       have higher levels of insulin resistance than their normal weight counterparts.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To investigate the factors associated with platelet activation in       obese children. DESIGN: Cross-sectional study. SETTING: Department of Pediatrics       of Regional Hospital N∘ 1 of Mexican Institute of Social Security in Morelia,       Michoacán, Mexico. PARTICIPANTS: 79 obese and 64 non-obese children between the       ages of 5 and 10 years. MAIN OUTCOMES MEASURES: Obese children (body mass index       [BMI] >85 in growth curves for Centers for Disease Control/National Center for       Health Statistics), and the control group of 64 non-obese children (percentile       <85), % body fat, platelet activation was assessed by sP-selectin. Other measures       were leptin, uric acid (UA), von Willebrand Factor (vWF), plasminogen activator       inhibitor (PAI-1), lipid profile, and glucose. RESULTS: Obese children displayed       higher plasma sP-selectin, leptin, PAI-1, and vWF than non-obese children. In the       univariate logistic regression analysis, leptin, vWF, UA, and high density       lipoprotein (HDL), but not with PAI-1, were factors associated with platelet       activation. By stepwise linear regression analysis adjusted by sex and age, the       best predictor variables for platelet activation were leptin (β:0.381; t:4.665;       P=0.0001), vWF (β:0.211; t:2.926; P=0.004), UA (β:0.166; t:2.146; P=0.034), and       HDL (β:-0.215; t:-2.819; P=0.006). CONCLUSIONS: Obese children have a higher risk       of developing early platelet activation. Factors associated with platelet       activation were Leptin, vWF, UA, and HDL. Further studies involving larger       numbers of patients over a longer duration are needed to understand the possible       molecular mechanism underlying the association between leptin, vWF, and UA and       endothelial activation and/or endothelial damage/dysfunction in obese children       and its influence in cardiovascular disease in adults.
AB  - INTRODUCTION: Obesity is considered an epidemic condition. It is related to the       increased prevalence of chronic degenerative diseases, but there are no studies       in the Mexican paediatric population on its relationship with sleep disorders.       AIM OF THE STUDY: We sought to determine the prevalence of sleep disorders in       paediatrics, as well as factors for their development. MATERIAL AND METHODS: An       observational, analytical, retrospective study, was performed including patients       aged 2 to 16 years, between March 2019-2021. The Paediatric Sleep Questionnaire       was used to assess the presence of sleep disorders. RESULTS: Sixty-four patients       were included, 27 (42.18%) of whom had sleep disorder criteria. Among these,       obesity, i.e. weight percentile ≥ 75 and body mass index percentile ≥ 93.5, was       a risk factor. Normal weight was protective. CONCLUSIONS: Obesity in paediatric       patients may favour the appearance of sleep disorders; screening could favour       early diagnosis, correct treatment, and better life quality.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Mexico occupies one of the first places worldwide in childhood       obesity. Its Mestizo and Indigenous communities present different levels of       westernization which have triggered different epidemiological diseases. We       assessed the effects of a multi-component school-based intervention program on       obesity, cardiovascular and diabetes risk factors. METHODS: A physical activity,       health education and parent involvement (PAHEPI) program was developed and       applied in six urban (Mestizo ethnic group) and indigenous (Seri and Yaqui ethnic       groups) primary schools for 12 weeks. A total of 320 children aged 4-12 years       participated in intervention program; 203 under Treatment 1 (PAHEPI program) and       117, only from Mestizo groups, under Treatment 2 (PAHEPI+ school meals). For Body       Mass Index (BMI), cardiovascular and diabetes factors, pairwise comparisons of       values at baseline and after treatments were done using Wilcoxon signed rank       test. Generalized linear models were applied to assess the intervention effect by       age, sex and nutritional status in relation to ethnicity and treatment. RESULTS:       We observed improvements on BMI in children with overweight-obesity and in       triglycerides in the three ethnic groups. The Mestizo ethnic group showed the       largest improvements under Treatment 2. While Seris showed improvements only in       cardiovascular risk factors, Yaquis also showed improvements in diabetes risk       factors, though not in BMI. CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that the same       intervention may have positive but different effects in different ethnic groups       depending on their lifestyle and their emerging epidemiological disease.       Including this type of intervention as part of the school curriculum would allow       to adapt to ethnic group in order to contribute more efficiently to child       welfare. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was retrospectively registered under the       identifier NCT03768245 .
AB  - BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Maternal obesity is associated with increased risk of       obesity and other symptoms of the metabolic syndrome in the offspring.       Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms and cellular factors underlying this       enhanced disease susceptibility remain to be determined. Here, we aimed at       identifying changes in plasma lipids in offspring of obese mothers that might       underpin, and serve as early biomarkers of, their enhanced metabolic disease       risk. SUBJECTS/METHODS: We performed a longitudinal lipidomic profiling in plasma       samples from normal weight, overweight, and obese pregnant women and their       children that participated in the Prenatal Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation,       Growth, and Development trial conducted in Mexico. At recruitment women were aged       between 18 and 35 years and in week 18-22 of pregnancy. Blood samples were       collected at term delivery by venipuncture from mothers and from the umbilical       cord of their newborns and from the same infants at 4 years old under non-fasting       conditions. Lipidomic profiling was done using ultra-performance liquid       chromatography high-resolution mass spectrometry. RESULTS: Analysis of the       lipidomic data showed that overweight and obese mothers exhibited a significant       reduction in the total abundance of ceramides (Cer) in plasma, mainly of Cer       (d18:1/20:0), Cer (d18:1/22:0), Cer (d18:1/23:0), and Cer (d18:1/24:0), compared       with mothers of normal body weight. This reduction was confirmed by the direct       quantification of these and other ceramide species. Similar quantitative       differences in the plasma concentration of Cer (d18:1/22:0), Cer (d18:1/23:0),       and Cer (d18:1/24:0), were also found between 4-year-old children of overweight       and obese mothers compared with children of mothers of normal body weight.       Noteworthy, children exhibited equal daily amounts of energy and food intake       independently of the BMI of their mothers. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal obesity results       in long-lasting changes in plasma ceramides in the offspring suggesting that       these lipids might be used as early predictors of metabolic disease risk due to       maternal obesity.
AB  - INTRODUCTION: The development of chronic-degenerative diseases secondary to       obesity in early infancy has alerted health providers to the importance of       identifying the risk factors for obesity and assessing preventive treatment to       reduce risks. Studies performed on a pediatric population have examined the role       of inflammatory biomarkers (specifically CRP and TNF-α) and adiposity with       inconsistent results. OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between the serum       levels of C-reactive protein and tumor necrosis factor-alfa with adiposity       measured by bioimpedance analysis in schoolchildren. METHODS: Cross sectional       design. Data were collected from 74 schoolchildren randomly selected in a local       primary school in the city of Colima, Mexico. The mean age was 9.4 years (1.5,       SD); 33 (44.6%) were girls. The adiposity (percentage of fat mass) was measured       using bioimpedance analysis and anthropometric measurements. Serum C-reactive       protein and tumor necrosis factor alpha were determined with enzyme-linked       immunosorbent assay. The association between adiposity and serum inflammatory       biomarkers was assessed with non parametric tests (Mann Whitney and Kruskall       Wallis tests), and parametric tests (Pearson's correlation). RESULTS: Children       with obesity had a significantly higher level of C-reactive protein [2.90 mg/L       (0.07-9.37)] compared with children with a normal percentage of fat mass [0.71       mg/L (0.07-5.75)] (p < 0.001). No differences between groups were identified       regarding serum levels of tumor necrosis factor-alfa. Modest correlations were       identified between serum levels of C-reactive protein, adiposity determined by       bioimpedance analysis (r = 0.453, p < 0.001); body mass index (r = 0.398, p =       0.001); triceps skinfold (r = 0.369, p = 0.002); and subescapular skinfold (r =       0.405, p < 0.001). No correlation was found between adiposity and serum tumor       necrosis factor-alfa. CONCLUSION: Subclinical inflammation manifested by higher       serum levels of C-reactive protein was identified in schoolchildren with higher       percentage of fat mass as determined by bioimpedance analysis and other       anthropometric measurements.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has serious health       implications and upward trends of the disease, accompanied by the obesity       epidemic worldwide. OBJECTIVE: To screen for fatty liver in overweight and obese       children and evaluate the factors associated with an increased likelihood of       presenting a positive-screen result. MATERIAL AND METHODS: In a cross-sectional       study, 102 children were recruited at a secondary care medical unit. Serum       alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were quantified and hepatic ultrasounds       were performed; multiple logistic regression models were used to evaluate factors       associated with the increased odds of presenting with NAFLD (fatty infiltration       on ultrasound and ALT > 52 U/L for boys and > 44 U/L for girls). RESULTS: The       overall prevalence of NAFLD was 10.8%. In multivariate analysis, a waist-to-hip       ratio ≥ 1 was associated with increased odds of screening positive for NAFLD       (odds ratio (OR) = 4.96, 95% CI 1.17-20.90). CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate       that one out of ten children with overweight or obesity has data suggestive of       NAFLD and is at risk of presenting its consequences on health.
AB  - In Mexico, due to the high rates of diabetes, overweight, and obesity, there has       also been noted an increased newborn weight, which may be contributing to the       elevated incidence rate of childhood acute leukemia (AL). We conducted a       case-control study in public hospitals of Mexico City aimed to know whether a       greater weight at birth is associated with a higher risk of developing leukemia.       We included incident cases with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute       myeloid leukemia (AML) diagnosed between 2010 and 2015. Controls were       frequency-matched to the cases by age, sex, and health institution. Logistic       regression analysis was performed adjusting risks by child's sex, overcrowding       index, birth order, and mother's age at the time of pregnancy. Adjusted odds       ratios (aORs) and 95% confidence intervals were calculated. A total of 1455 cases       and 1455 controls were included. An evident association between ALL and child's       birthweight ≥2500 g was found (aOR 2.06; 95% CI: 1.59, 2.66) and also, in those       with birthweight ≥3500 g (aOR 1.19; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.41). In AML patients with       birthweight ≥2500 g and ≥3500 g, an aOR of 1.77 (95% CI: 1.07, 2.94) and 1.42       (95% CI: 1.03-1.95) was observed, respectively. No association was noticed with       either type of AL and a birthweight ≥4000 g. To sum up, we found a moderate       association between not having a low birthweight and an increased risk of acute       leukemias. Birthweight ≥3500 g was also a risk factor for both types of leukemia.       This suggests that a greater birthweight may increase the risk of acute leukemias       in Mexican children.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus type 2 (T2DM) is a state of hyperglycemia due to a       defect in the secretion and/or action of insulin, and it represents the most       common form of diabetes worldwide. In Mexico, 10.3% of the adult population have       been diagnosed with T2DM and it is expanding to the pediatric population. AIM: To       evaluate and compare the prevalence of T2DM in the pediatric population at the       Children's Hospital, "Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez (HIMFG)", at two       time periods: 2013 vs 2018. METHODS: A comparison of two cross-sectional studies       was done (2013 and 2018). The study population was comprised of children and       adolescents 8-17 years old, from the Diabetes Clinic at the aforementioned       institution. A comprehensive interrogation regarding family history and perinatal       antecedents was performed. Complete blood work after 12 h of fasting was obtained       to determine serum levels of glucose, glycated hemoglobin, lipid profile,       C-peptide, and insulin. The data were analysed using the statistical software       package SPSS v. 23.0. A P value of < 0.05 was considered statistically       significant. RESULTS: A total of 151 patients were included: 47 from 2013, and       104 from 2018. There were age differences noted between the two periods with       younger patients presenting T2DM in 2013. Also, T2DM predominated in the male sex       in 55.36% in 2013 vs 32.7% in 2018. An increased prevalence of T2DM was noted       from 2013 to 2018 (20.2% vs 33.0%, respectively), which was a statistically       significant 12.8% increase (P < 0.0001). The illness phenotype was more       aggressive in the 2018 group with the presence of a higher proportion of obesity,       insulin resistance, and adverse lipid profiles. CONCLUSION: The prevalence of       T2DM at the HIMFG institution from 2013 to 2018 increased by 12.8% (20.2% vs       33.0%, respectively). The study results demonstrate the need for vigilance in       T2DM trends, and to strengthen programs of healthy nutrition and physical       activity as well as early detection and risk factors for obesity, data on insulin       resistance, and metabolic syndrome, with the aim of preventing the development of       T2DM.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The increase in childhood obesity and prevalence of chronic disease       risk factors demonstrate the importance of creating healthy school environments.       As part of the Border Health Strategic Initiative, the School Health Index was       implemented in public schools in two counties along the Arizona, United       States-Sonora, Mexico border. Developed in 2000 by the Centers for Disease       Control and Prevention, the School Health Index offers a guide to assist schools       in evaluating and improving opportunities for physical activity and good       nutrition for their students. CONTEXT: Between 2000 and 2003, a total of 13       schools from five school districts in two counties participated in the School       Health Index project despite academic pressures and limited resources. METHODS:       The Border Health Strategic Initiative supported the hiring and training of an       external coordinator in each county who was not part of the school system but who       was an employee in an established community-based organization. The coordinators       worked with the schools to implement the School Health Index, to develop action       plans, and to monitor progress toward these goals. CONSEQUENCES: The School       Health Index process and school team participation varied from school to school.       Individual plans were different but all focused on reducing in-school access to       unhealthy foods, identified as high-fat and/or of low nutritional value. Ideas       for acting on this focus ranged from changing the content of school lunches to       discontinuing the use of nonnutritious foods as classroom rewards. All plans       included recommendations that could be implemented immediately as well as those       that would require planning and perhaps the formation and assistance of a       subcommittee (e.g., for developing or adopting a district-wide health       curriculum). INTERPRETATION: After working with the School Health Index, most       schools made at least one immediate change in their school environments. The       external coordinator was essential to keeping the School Health Index results and       action plans on the agendas of school administrators, especially during periods       of staff turnover. Staff turnover, lack of time, and limited resources resulted       in few schools achieving longer-term policy changes.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The cardiovascular risk (CVR) is increasing and it is related to life       style and dietary habits; one of the age groups at risk of developing this       disease are the obese children. The objective of this study was to assess the CVR       in the obese pediatric population in a secondary care unit of the Instituto       Mexicano del Seguro Social in San Luis Potosí, México. METHODS: A cross-sectional       study, in which we used Alústiza's scale to measure CVR. We included the total of       cases of pediatric obese population in a year. We performed the analysis by each       of the variables included in the scale (age, sex, body mass index, family history       of diabetes and obesity, alcohol, blood pressure, cholesterol). High CVR was       correlated to HDL and glucose, through a statistical analysis with chi-squared.       RESULTS: We reviewed a total of 100 medical records of children from 6 to 15       years (52 girls, 48 boys). CVR was low in 26 %, moderate in 14 % and higher in 60       %. A positive history of obesity was found in 26 %; obesity plus diabetes, 16 %;       obesity and dyslipidemia, 13 %; hypertension, 11 %. None of the children       practiced excercise. We found hypercholesterolemia in 46 %, and hyperglycemia in       34 %. By using chi-squared we found that all variables were statistically       significant (p &lt; 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Validated scales are useful to measure       CVR in children, in order to take action in a timely fashion and avoid the       persistence of risk in adulthood.
AB  - INTRODUCTION: Abdominal fat, particularly visceral, is associated with a high       risk of metabolic complications. The waist-height ratio (WHtR) is used to assess       abdominal fat in individuals of all ages. OBJECTIVE: To determine the ability of       the waist-to-height ratio to detect metabolic risk in mexican schoolchildren.       PATIENTS AND METHOD: A study was conducted on children between 6 and 12 years.       Obesity was diagnosed as a body mass index (BMI) ≥ 85th percentile, and an ICE       ≥0.5 was considered abdominal obesity. Blood levels of glucose, cholesterol and       triglycerides were measured. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive       and negative value, area under curve, the positive likelihood ratio and negative       likelihood ratio of the WHtR and BMI were calculated in order to identify       metabolic alterations. WHtR and BMI were compared to determine which had the best       diagnostic efficiency. RESULTS: Of the 223 children included in the study, 51 had       hypertriglyceridaemia, 27 with hypercholesterolaemia, and 9 with hyperglycaemia.       On comparing the diagnostic efficiency of WHtR with that of BMI, there was a       sensitivity of 100% vs. 56% for hyperglycaemia, 93 vs. 70% for cholesterol, and       76 vs. 59% for hypertriglyceridaemia. The specificity, negative predictive value,       positive predictive value, positive likelihood ratio, negative likelihood ratio,       and area under curve were also higher for WHtR. CONCLUSIONS: The WHtR is a more       efficient indicator than BMI in identifying metabolic risk in mexican school-age.
AB  - Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is currently the most common cause of       liver disease in children and adolescents in the United States of America (USA)       and probably in the entire western hemisphere, due to the increase in the       prevalence of overweight and obesity. Steatosis can progress to inflammation,       fibrosis and even cirrhosis, which increases the morbidity and mortality       associated to liver disease. In every overweight and obese child a thorough       analysis should be performed including liver function tests and liver ultrasound,       in order to establish a timely diagnosis. The liver biopsy is the most specific       study to rule out other potentially treatable entities. It is necessary to count       on non-invasive methods to detect children with NAFLD and identify those in risk       of progression. Biomarkers related to inflammation, oxidative stress, apoptosis       and fibrosis have been reported. The main goal of the treatment is to modify the       life style, starting with a healthy diet and an increase of physical activity.       Regarding pharmacological treatment, there is evidence of histological       improvement with vitamin E use, as opposed to metformin, but more conclusive       studies regarding this subject are needed.
AB  - BACKGROUND: There is evidence of associations of single-nucleotide polymorphisms       (SNPs) with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and related glycemic traits in adults, but       there is a little information about such associations in youths. OBJECTIVE: The       aim of this study was to evaluate the associations of SNPs in the TCF7L2,       SLC16A11, and ABCA1 genes with T2D and related glycemic traits in Mexican       children and adolescents. SUBJECTS: A total of 99 families with children with T2D       (n = 327) and 83 families with children without the disease (n = 212). METHODS:       The associations between SNPs of TCF7L2 (rs7903146 and rs12255372), SLC16A11       (rs13342232), and ABCA1 (rs9282541) with T2D were analyzed. We also evaluated the       effects of SNPs on quantitatively related glycemic traits after adjusting for       age, sex, and the presence of overweight or obesity. RESULTS: The G allele of       SLC16A1 /rs13342232 was associated with T2D in adults (adjusted odds ratio       [ORadj] = 1.89; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.18; 3.06) and children       (ORadj = 1.94; 95% CI: 1.25; 3.00). In addition, the combined analysis of       case-control and case-parent trio was also significant (OR = 1.43; 95% CI: 1.12;       1.74). After adjusting for known confounding factors, we found a significant       association between TCF7L2/rs122555372 and C-peptide (β = -0.76, P = .005) in       patients with diabetes and between fasting glucose (β = 2.05, P = .039) and       homeostatic model assessment of β-cell function (β = -32.14, P = .025) levels in       individuals without diabetes. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that SLC16A1       /rs13342232 might be involved in the risk of pediatric-onset T2D in Mexican       families. Moreover, TCF7L2/rs122555372 was associated with pancreatic reserve in       patients with T2D and with fasting glucose and β-cell function in individuals       without diabetes.
AB  - Introduction: many obese children will be obese adults unless they adopt and       maintain healthy eating and physical activity patterns. Anxiety has been       described in overweight and obese children with dysfunctional family       environments, with impact on their quality of life; risk for some eating disorder       was also found. Objective: to identify anxiety in the presence of food in       schoolchildren in Baja California Sur. Material and methods: a cross-sectional       study in 406 schoolchildren, from 8 to 13 years of age, was performed:       nutritional status calculation, measurements of attitudes towards food (cut-off       point > 20), socioeconomic level, type of family, and intake of junk food were       collected. Descriptive statistics and association measures were performed using       Student's t-test and the chi-squared test. Parents provided their informed       consent, and children provided their assent. Results: a total of 406       schoolchildren were evaluated, with ages of 10.4 ± 1.2. Of these, 53 % had       healthy weight, 44 % had overweight or obesity, and 3 % were underweight.       Functional families predominated at 67 %. A middle socioeconomic level was found       in 64 %. In all, 94 % consumed junk food. There is an association between anxiety       in the presence of food and socioeconomic status, and anxiety in the presence of       food and nutritional status (p = 0.01). In overweight and obese schoolchildren no       association was found between study variables. There is anxiety in the presence       of food in 40 % of the sample due to external factors, in 5 % because of       tiredness or boredom, in 11 % because of negative feelings. Conclusion: there is       an association between anxiety, socioeconomic status, and nutritional status.       Anxiety in the presence of food occurred in 54.7 % of cases.
AB  - The co-existence of very short stature due to poor chronic environment in early       life and obesity is becoming a public health concern in rapidly transitioning       populations with high levels of poverty. Individuals who have very short stature       seem to be at an increased risk of obesity in times of relative caloric       abundance. Increasing evidence shows that an individual is influenced by       exposures in previous generations. This study assesses whether maternal poor       early life environment predicts her child's adiposity using cross sectional       design on Maya schoolchildren aged 7-9 and their mothers (n = 57 pairs). We       compared maternal chronic early life environment (stature) with her child's       adiposity (body mass index [BMI] z-score, waist circumference z-score, and       percentage body fat) using multiple linear regression, controlling for the       child's own environmental exposures (household sanitation and maternal parity).       The research was performed in the south of Merida, Yucatan, Mexico, a low       socioeconomic urban area in an upper middle income country. The Maya mothers were       very short, with a mean stature of 147 cm. The children had fairly high adiposity       levels, with BMI and waist circumference z-scores above the reference median.       Maternal stature did not significantly predict any child adiposity indicator.       There does not appear to be an intergenerational component of maternal early life       chronic under-nutrition on her child's obesity risk within this free living       population living in poverty. These results suggest that the co-existence of very       short stature and obesity appears to be primarily due to exposures and       experiences within a generation rather than across generations.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Dyslipidemia is an important risk factor for the development of       several diseases. The genetic component of hypertriglyceridemia has been studied       in adults, but little is known in children. OBJECTIVE: The objective is to       evaluate the association of two variants in APOA5 (rs662799) and APOA1 (rs5072)       with triglyceride (TG) levels in Mexican children. METHODS: Anthropometric       parameters were measured in 1559 Mexican children 5-14 years of age. DNA was       isolated from blood samples. Lipid profiles and glucose concentrations were       determined from serum and genotyping of rs662799, and rs5072 was performed using       TaqMan® technology. Additive and dominant models adjusted for age, gender and       body mass index were used to evaluate the association of these single nucleotide       polymorphisms with TG levels. RESULTS: Children with high TG levels were found to       have a higher body mass index and waist circumference as well as a worse lipids       profile and glucose levels (p < 0.001). Additive and dominant models demonstrated       a significant association between the rs662799 and rs5072 with TG. The dominant       model showed the strongest significant association (OR = 1.81; 95% CI 1.46-2.24;       p = 5.40 × 10(-08) for rs662799 and OR = 1.54; 95% CI 1.05-2.25;       p = 2.60 × 10(-02) for rs5072). CONCLUSION: The minor alleles of rs662799 (APOA5)       and rs5072 (APOA1) modulate TG levels in Mexican children.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Epidemiological evidence suggests that populations with high fruit       and vegetable (FV) consumption have a lower risk for childhood obesity, cancer       and cardiovascular diseases. There are no studies that address the correlates of       FV intake in Mexican children; therefore, the aim of this study was to identify       the frequency of FV consumption by children in Mexico City's low income state       schools and their personal (preferences, expectancy, knowledge and self-efficacy)       and environmental (accessibility and person in charge of cooking at home)       correlates. METHODS: A validated questionnaire to assess accessibility,       expectancy, self-efficacy, preference and knowledge; and a 2-day dietary recall       were used to assess the FV intake and its correlates in 327 children. Statistical       analysis included chi-square and stepwise logistic regression. RESULTS: Average       consumption of FV was once a day with a higher proportion of girls consuming FV 3       or more times per day (15.2% versus 6.7%; P < 0.01). The environmental factors       that influenced a higher consumption of FV were the mother being responsible for       cooking at home (P < 0.02) and accessibility to FV (P < 0.01); whereas the       personal factors were self-efficacy (P < 0.05) and preference (P < 0.03) to       vegetables. CONCLUSION: Correlates of fruit and vegetable consumption in children       from Mexico City's State Schools were being female and accessibility to fruits       and vegetables. Home and school environments are decisive for the children to       increase FV consumption. Creative ways to encourage FV consumption in boys should       be explored. These factors should be considered when designing programmes aimed       at increasing consumption of fruits and vegetables in children.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association of hypomagnesemia with prehypertension       (preHTN) and hypertension in children. STUDY DESIGN: A total of 3954 apparently       healthy Mexican children were enrolled in a cross-sectional study. Exclusion       criteria were type 2 diabetes; hepatic, renal, or endocrine disease; impaired       fasting glucose; chronic diarrhea; and intake of vitamins or magnesium       supplements in the previous 6 months. preHTN was defined by systolic and/or       diastolic blood pressure ≥90th to <95th percentile and hypertension by systolic       and/or diastolic blood pressure ≥95th percentile, according to age, sex, and       height percentile. Hypomagnesemia was defined by serum magnesium concentration       <1.8 mg/dL (<0.74 mmol/L). To control for potential sources of bias related to       age, participants were allocated into 2 groups, aged 6-10 years and 11-15 years.       RESULTS: The prevalence of preHTN and hypertension was 12.2% and 6.4%,       respectively, in children aged 6-10 years and 13.9% and 10.6% in those aged       11-15 years. Hypomagnesemia was identified in 59 children with preHTN (27.3%) and       52 (45.6%) with hypertension in the 6-10 year age group, and in 115 children with       preHTN (36.0%) and 109 (49.6%) with hypertension in the 11-15 year age group.       Adjusted multiple logistic regression analysis showed that in children in both       age groups, hypomagnesemia was associated with both preHTN (6-10 years: OR, 2.18,       P < .0005; 11-15 years: OR, 1.38, P = .018) and hypertension (6-10 years: OR,       4.87, P < .0005; 11-15 years: OR, 1.83, P = .0002). CONCLUSION: Our results       indicate that serum magnesium level <1.8 mg/dL is significantly associated with       preHTN and hypertension in apparently healthy children.
AB  - BACKGROUND: There is growing evidence of the impact of overweight and obesity on       short- and long-term functioning, health and well-being. Internationally,       childhood obesity rates continue to rise in some countries (for example, Mexico,       India, China and Canada), although there is emerging evidence of a slowing of       this increase or a plateauing in some age groups. In most European countries, the       United States and Australia, however, socioeconomic inequalities in relation to       obesity and risk factors for obesity are widening. Addressing inequalities in       obesity, therefore, has a very high profile on the public health and health       services agendas. However, there is a lack of accessible policy-ready evidence on       what works in terms of interventions to reduce inequalities in obesity. METHODS       AND DESIGN: This article describes the protocol for a National Health Service       Trust (NHS) National Institute for Health Research-funded systematic review of       public health interventions at the individual, community and societal levels       which might reduce socioeconomic inequalities in relation to obesity amongst       children ages 0 to 18 years. The studies will be selected only if (1) they       included a primary outcome that is a proxy for body fatness and (2) examined       differential effects with regard to socioeconomic status (education, income,       occupation, social class, deprivation and poverty) or the intervention was       targeted specifically at disadvantaged groups (for example, children of the       unemployed, lone parents, low income and so on) or at people who live in deprived       areas. A rigorous and inclusive international literature search will be conducted       for randomised and nonrandomised controlled trials, prospective and retrospective       cohort studies (with and/or without control groups) and prospective repeat       cross-sectional studies (with and/or without control groups). The following       electronic databases will be searched: MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, Social       Science Citation Index, ASSIA, IBSS, Sociological Abstracts and the NHS Economic       Evaluation Database. Database searches will be supplemented with website and grey       literature searches. No studies will be excluded on the basis of language,       country of origin or publication date. Study inclusion, data extraction and       quality appraisal will be conducted by two reviewers. Meta-analysis and narrative       synthesis will be conducted. The main analysis will examine the effects of (1)       individual, (2) community and (3) societal level public health interventions on       socioeconomic inequalities in childhood obesity. Interventions will be       characterised by their level of action and their approach to tackling       inequalities. Contextual information on how such public health interventions are       organised, implemented and delivered will also be examined. DISCUSSION: In this       review, we consider public health strategies which reduce and prevent       inequalities in the prevalence of childhood obesity, highlight any gaps in the       evidence base and seek to establish how such public health interventions are       organised, implemented and delivered. PROSPERO registration number:       CRD42011001740.
AB  - Obesity related to over-nutrition is investigated in a sample of 219 Mexican       children from affluent families, ages 6-12 years. Defined as weight-for-age at or       above the 95(th) percentile, obesity rates in middle childhood are very high in       this population, being 24.2% of children (29.4% of boys and 19.1% of girls).       Binary logistic regression shows that children are more likely to be obese if       they are boys, from small households with few or no other children, and have more       permissive, less authoritarian parents. Diet at school and activity patterns,       including television viewing, are not different for boys and girls and so do not       explain this gender variation. The value placed on children, especially sons, in       smaller middle-class families, can result in indulgent feeding because food       treats are a cultural index of parental caring. Parents also value child fatness       as a sign of health. These obese Mexican children have no greater social problems       (peer rejection or stigma) or psychological problems (anxiety, depression, or low       self esteem) than their non-obese peers. More study specifically focused on       feeding practices in the home environment is required to explain very high rates       of child obesity. The differences in obesity risk related to specific aspects of       children's developmental microniche emphasize the importance of including a focus       on gender as a socio-ecological construct in human biological studies of child       growth, development, and nutrition.
AB  - BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Obesity is a complex, chronic, and multifactorial disease       that has become a major, and worldwide, public health problem contributing to an       increased number of pathologies, including type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular       disease, hyperlipidemia, and metabolic syndrome, thus suggesting a commolon       origin. A diet high in sugar and fats coupled with a sedentary lifestyle has a       major role in the development of obesity. However, the genetic background has       also been associated with body fat accumulation. The aim of this study was to       assess the effect ofACE-rs4646994, APOA5-rs662799, and MTP-rs1800591 gene       polymorphisms on clinical and biochemical parameters and to evaluate the       association with body phenotypes in children and adolescent population of       Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. METHODS: Anthropometric, clinical, biochemical       parameters and BMI were obtained from 405 children and adolescents. The BMI was       used to determine the body phenotype. The rs4646994 gene polymorphism was       determined by PCR, whereas rs662799 and rs1800591 were determined by PCR-RFLP.       The obtained results were analyzed to determine their association of these single       nucleotide polymorphisms with body phenotype and biochemical parameters. RESULTS:       TT genotype for APOA5-rs662799 was associated with increased levels of HDL-C in       the analyzed population (p <0.05). The ACErs4646994gene polymorphism is       associated with high Insulin levels, HOMAIR index, and triglyceride levels,       mainly when presenting a I/I genotype (p <0.05). CONCLUSION: The polymorphic       allele of the ACE gene is capable of modulating triglyceride levels, insulin       levels and HOMA-IR index in the evaluated population; it must be highlighted that       this has not been reported in other studied populations elsewhere.
AB  - Gut metagenome in pediatric subjects with metabolic syndrome (MetS) and type-2       diabetes mellitus (T2DM) has been poorly studied, despite an alarming worldwide       increase in the prevalence and incidence of obesity and MetS within this       population. The objective of this study was to characterize the gut microbiome       taxonomic composition of Mexican pediatric subjects with MetS and T2DM using       shotgun metagenomics and analyze the potential relationship with metabolic       changes and proinflammatory effects. Paired-end reads of fecal DNA samples were       obtained through the Illumina HiSeq X Platform. Statistical analyses and       correlational studies were conducted using gut microbiome data and metadata from       all individuals. Gut microbial dysbiosis was observed in MetS and T2DM children       compared to healthy subjects, which was characterized by an increase in       facultative anaerobes (i.e., enteric and lactic acid bacteria) and a decrease in       strict anaerobes (i.e., Erysipelatoclostridium, Shaalia, and Actinomyces genera).       This may cause a loss of gut hypoxic environment, increased gut microbial       nitrogen metabolism, and higher production of pathogen-associated molecular       patterns. These metabolic changes may trigger the activation of proinflammatory       activity and impair the host's intermediate metabolism, leading to a possible       progression of the characteristic risk factors of MetS and T2DM, such as insulin       resistance, dyslipidemia, and an increased abdominal circumference. Furthermore,       specific viruses (Jiaodavirus genus and Inoviridae family) showed positive       correlations with proinflammatory cytokines involved in these metabolic diseases.       This study provides novel evidence for the characterization of MetS and T2DM       pediatric subjects in which the whole gut microbial composition has been       characterized. Additionally, it describes specific gut microorganisms with       functional changes that may influence the onset of relevant health risk factors.
AB  - Background: Failure to recognize children's overweight status by parents may       contribute to children's risk for obesity. We examined two methods of measuring       mothers' perceptions of children's weight and factors associated with weight       perception inaccuracy. Methods: Cross-sectional analyses of clinical and       self-report data from 287 Mexican-heritage mother-child dyads. Mothers identified       their child's weight category using a scale (e.g., "normal/overweight/obese") and       a visual silhouette scale (11 child gender-specific weight-varying images).       Children's height and weight were measured to calculate body mass index (BMI).       Chi-square tests examined associations between categorical, silhouette, and BMI       percentile categories of children's weight. Bivariate logistic regression       analyses examined factors associated with mothers' inaccuracy of their children's       weight. Results: Only 13% of mothers accurately classified their child as obese       using the categorical scale, while 78% accurately classified their child as obese       using the silhouette scale. Mothers were more likely to underestimate their       child's weight using BMI categories (62%) compared to using the silhouette scale       (23%). Predictors of mothers' underestimation using the categorical method were       child sex [female] (adjusted odds ratio [AOR] = 1.99; 95% CI: 1.02-3.86), child       age [younger age] (AOR = 10.39; 95% CI: 4.16-25.92 for ages 5-6 years), and       mother's weight status (overweight AOR = 2.99; 95% CI: 1.05-8.51; obese       AOR = 5.19; 95% CI: 1.89-14.18). Child BMI was the only predictor of mothers'       overestimation (AOR = 0.89; 95% CI: 0.85-0.94) using the silhouette method.       Conclusions: Using silhouette scales to identify children's body weight may be a       more accurate tool for clinicians and interventionists to activate parents'       awareness of unhealthy weight in children compared to using traditional       categorical weight-labeling methods.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Rapid early weight gain has been associated with increased risk of       obesity and cardiometabolic alterations, but evidence in low and middle-income       countries is inconclusive. OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the relation between relative       weight gain from 1 to 48 mo with adiposity and cardiometabolic risk factors at       4-5 y of age, and determined if adiposity is a mediator for cardiometabolic       alterations. METHODS: We studied 428 Mexican children with anthropometric and       blood pressure (BP) information from birth to 5 y of age from POSGRAD (Prenatal       Omega-3 fatty acid Supplementation and child GRowth And Development), of whom 334       provided measures of adiposity and cardiometabolic risk markers at 4 y. We       estimated relative weight gain by means of conditional weight-for-height z scores       for the age intervals 1-6, 6-12, 12-24, and 24-48 mo. Associations between       relative weight gain and adiposity and cardiometabolic risk markers (lipid       profile, triglycerides, insulin, glucose, and BP) were analyzed by multivariate       multiple linear models and path analysis. RESULTS: A 1-unit increase in       conditional weight-for-height z score within each age interval was positively       associated with adiposity at 5 y, with coefficients of 0.43-0.89 for body mass       index (BMI) z score, 1.08-3.65 mm for sum of skinfolds, and 1.21-3.87 cm for       abdominal circumference (all P < 0.01). Positive associations were documented       from ages 6 to 48 mo with systolic BP (coefficient ranges: 1.19-1.78 mm Hg; all       P < 0.05) and from ages 12 to 48 mo with diastolic BP (1.28-0.94 mm Hg; P < 0.05)       at 5 y. Conditional weight-for-height z scores at 12-24 and 24-48 mo of age were       more strongly associated with adiposity and BP relative to younger ages. A unit       increase in conditional weight-for-height z scores from 12 to 24 mo was       associated with 14% higher insulin levels (P < 0.05) at 4 y. Path analyses       documented that the associations of conditional weight gain with BP were mediated       by BMI and sum of skinfolds. CONCLUSION: Relative weight gain at most periods       during the first 4 y of life was associated with greater adiposity and higher       systolic and diastolic BP at 5 y. These associations with BP were mediated by       adiposity. Relative weight gain from 12 to 24 mo was associated with increased       serum insulin concentrations at 4 y, but there were no associations with lipid       profiles or glucose concentration.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: This intervention sought to promote healthy eating with the ultimate       goal of reducing childhood obesity risk. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three hundred and       sixty-one Latino families living on the US-Mexico border with at least one child       between 7-13 years of age were eligible to participate. Families randomly       assigned to the four-month intervention received 14 contacts with a promotora       (community health worker), consisting of 11 home visits and three telephone       calls; the control condition was a delayed treatment intervention. Children       reported on their dietary intake at baseline, immediately post-intervention and       at the six month follow-up visit. RESULTS: The intervention reduced weekly       consumption of fast food (p<0.05). A dose-response relationship was observed such       that for every seven hours of promotora contact, monthly variety of fruits       (p<0.01) and vegetables (p<0.01) increased by one. No other intervention effects       were observed. CONCLUSIONS: Family-based interventions can improve children's       eating habits, with the amount of contact with the promotora being key to       success.
AB  - Introduction: obesity in the pediatric population is a public health problem. The       correlation of uric acid and carotid intima media thickness in adults has been       demonstrated. Objective: to identify the correlation of uric acid and carotid       intima media thickness in adolescents with obesity. Material and methods: an       observational, cross-sectional study was carried out. Patients aged ten to 16       years with a diagnosis of obesity were included. Uric acid, lipid profile and       carotid intima media thickness were determined. In relation to the statistical       analysis, carotid intima media thickness was correlated with uric acid levels       through Spearman's correlation coefficient. Results: one hundred and sixty-nine       adolescents were included with a median age of 13 years, without predominance of       sex. A positive correlation of uric acid with carotid intima media thickness was       identified (r = 0.242, p = 0.001). When stratified according to sex, there was no       correlation in women (r = -0.187, p = 0.074), while in men it increased (r =       0.36, p = 0.001) and by pubertal stage, pubertal male adolescents had a positive       correlation (p = 0.384, p = 0.002). Conclusion: a weak positive correlation was       identified between carotid intimal thickness and uric acid in obese adolescents.
AB  - Delivery methods during childbirth and their related gut microbiota profiles have       important impacts on health later in life, they can contribute to the development       of diseases such as obesity, whose highest prevalence rate is found among the       Mexican child population. Coincidentally, Mexico has one of the highest global       average annual rate increase in cesarean births (C-section). Since Mexico leads       the world in childhood obesity, studying the relationship between childbirth       delivery methods and gut microbiota profiles in this vulnerable population may be       used to identify early risk factors for obesity in other developed and developing       countries. The objective of this study is to determine the association between       child delivery method and gut microbiota profiles in healthy Mexican       newborns.Fecal samples of 57 term infants who participated in a randomized       clinical trial in 2013 to study the safety of Agave fructans in newborns, were       used in this study. DNA samples were extracted and used to characterize the       microbiota composition using high-throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The       samples were further divided based on childbirth delivery method, as well as       early diet. Gut microbiota profiles were determined and analyzed using cluster       analysis followed by multiple correspondence analysis.An unusual high abundance       of Proteobacteria was found in the gut microbiota of all Mexican infants studied,       regardless of delivery method. Feces from infants born by C-section had low       levels of Bacteroidetes, high levels of Firmicutes, especially Clostridium and       Enterococcus, and a strikingly high ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F:B).       Profiles enriched in Bacteroidetes and low F:B ratios, were strongly associated       with vaginal delivery.The profile of gut microbiota associated with feces from       Mexican infants born by C-section, may be added to the list of boosting factors       for the worrying obesity epidemic in Mexico.
AB  - BACKGROUND AND AIMS: An increase in plasma branched-chain amino acids is       associated with a higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular       diseases. However, little is known about the basal plasma amino acid       concentrations in young adults. Our aim was to determine the plasma amino acid       profiles of young adults and to evaluate how these profiles were modified by sex,       body mass index (BMI) and insulin resistance (IR). METHODS AND RESULTS: We       performed a transversal study with 608 Mexican young adults aged 19.9 ± 2.4 years       who were applicants to the Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosí. The subjects       underwent a physical examination and provided a clinical history and a blood       sample for biochemical, hormonal and amino acid analyses. The women had higher       levels of arginine, aspartate and serine and lower levels of α-aminoadipic acid,       cysteine, isoleucine, leucine, methionine, proline, tryptophan, tyrosine, urea       and valine than the men. The obese subjects had higher levels of alanine,       aspartate, cysteine, ornithine, phenylalanine, proline and tyrosine and lower       levels of glycine, ornithine and serine than the normal weight subjects. Subjects       with IR (defined as HOMA > 2.5) had higher levels of arginine, alanine,       aspartate, isoleucine, leucine, phenylalanine, proline, tyrosine, taurine and       valine than the subjects without IR. Furthermore, we identified two main groups       in the subjects with obesity and/or IR; one group was composed of amino acids       that positively correlated with the clinical, biochemical and hormonal       parameters, whereas the second group exhibited negative correlations. CONCLUSION:       This study demonstrates that young adults with obesity or IR have altered amino       acid profiles characterized by an increase in alanine, aspartate, proline and       tyrosine and a decrease in glycine.
AB  - BACKGROUND: There is a growing body of evidence indicating that pediatric       survivors of cancer are at a greater risk of developing metabolic syndrome. This       study evaluated some probable predictors of metabolic syndrome (MS), such as       leptin and adiponectin concentrations, the leptin/adiponectin ratio, insulin       resistance, and adiposity, in a sample of child survivors of lymphoma and       leukemia in Mexico City. METHODS: Fifty two children (leukemia n = 26, lymphoma       n = 26), who were within the first 5 years after cessation of therapy, were       considered as eligible to participate in the study. Testing included fasting       insulin, glucose, adipokines and lipids; body fat mass was measured by DXA. The       MS components were analyzed according to tertiles of adipokines, insulin       resistance, and adiposity. Comparisons between continuous variables were       performed according to the data distribution. The MS components were analyzed       according to tertiles of adipokines, insulin resistance, and adiposity. With the       purpose of assessing the risk of a present MS diagnosis, odds ratios (OR) with a       95% confidence interval (95% IC) were obtained using logistic regression analysis       according to the various metabolic markers. RESULTS: The median children age was       12.1 years, and the interval time from the completion of therapy to study       enrollment was 4 years. Among the MS components, the prevalence of HDL-C low was       most common (42%), followed by central obesity (29%). The HOMA-IR (OR 9.0, 95% CI       2.0; 41.1), body fat (OR 5.5, 95% CI 1.6; 19.3), leptin level (OR 5.7, 95% CI       1.6; 20.2) and leptin/adiponectin ratio (OR 9.4, 95% CI 2.0; 49.8) in the highest       tertile, were predictive factors of developing MS; whereas the lowest tertile of       adiponectin was associated with a protective effect but not significant.       CONCLUSIONS: Biomarkers such as HOMA-IR, leptin and leptin/adiponectin are       associated with each of the components of the MS and with a heightened risk of       suffering MS among children survivors of cancer. Given the close relationship       between MS with risk of developing type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease, it       is imperative to implement prevention measures in this population and especially       in developing countries where these pathologies have become the leading cause of       death.
AB  - Physical inactivity and a sedentary lifestyle are risk factors for excess weight       and obesity in childhood. It is, therefore, necessary to adopt strategies which       can modify these behaviors during childhood, the age at which habits are formed.       This study aimed to evaluate the impact of an educational intervention using       digital media and face-to-face activities involving children, parents, and the       school community on the level of physical activity and sedentary behavior among       schoolchildren. This was a secondary analysis of data obtained from a community       trial in which students from four primary schools in Mexico City participated.       Two schools were assigned to the intervention group (IG) and two to the control       group (CG). The intervention lasted 12 months and included a face-to-face       component, which involved sessions and workshops for parents and children, as       well as visual material for children and a distance component utilizing       electronic means (web portal and text messages to mobile phones) for parents.       Anthropometric measurements were taken and information was collected on moderate       to vigorous physical activity performed by the children and on the time that the       schoolchildren spent in front of screens at the beginning of the study and at 6       and 12 months. Information on 201 children from the IG and 167 children from the       CG was included in the analysis. At 12 months, the IG showed a mean decrease of       33.4 min/d [95% CI: -53.5 to -13.3] in screen time, while the CG showed an       increase of 12.5 min/d [CI 95%: -10.5 to 35.6], p = 0.003. After 12 months of       follow-up, applying this educational intervention reduced the time that       schoolchildren spent in front of screens. Educational intervention is a feasible       and accessible strategy for promoting changes in sedentary behaviors in the       school-age population.
AB  - BACKGROUND: In addition to the increased incidence of asthma, obesity in       asthmatic children is also on the rise. Several studies have been performed to       determine whether obesity could be a risk factor for asthma, but this association       has not been demonstrated in all patients. The Pediatric Asthma Quality of Life       Questionnaire (PAQLQ) is a standardized and validated tool for use in the       pediatric population, which evaluates the effect of asthma on patients' daily       activities. METHODS AND RESULTS: To determine the effect of obesity and       overweight on quality of life, the PAQLQS was applied to 100 pediatric patients       with intermittent asthma and mild persistent asthma and obesity, overweight and       normal weight. The results of the three dimensions evaluated in the questionnaire       (emotions, symptoms and limitation of activities) showed significant differences       in quality of life in the obese asthmatic group only (p < 0.000). No differences       were found when the groups with and without overweight were compared.       CONCLUSIONS: The PAQLQ revealed a significant difference in the quality of life       in obese asthmatic patients. Overweight and normal weight had no effect quality       of life.
AB  - Previous studies in the Mexican adult population have suggested a relationship       between low levels of serum concentrations of serum vitamin D with impaired       glucose tolerance, metabolic syndrome, and diabetes, regardless of the presence       of obesity. The aim of this study is to investigate the relationship between       serum vitamin D levels and the factors linked to insulin resistance. A total of       533 children and adolescents from the "Reference Values of Body Composition in       the Pediatric Population of Mexico City" study are assessed. Body composition,       dietary, and lifestyle data are obtained. Serum vitamin D, insulin, and glucose       are also measured. Associations are tested using multiple linear and logistic       regression models. Approximately 90% of children and adolescents in this study       have sub-optimal vitamin D levels (<30 ng/mL). An inverse relationship between       insulin resistance and serum vitamin D is observed (OR (odds ratios) = 2.9; 95%       CI (95% confidence intervals): 1.1, 7.2; p-trend 0.03). Low serum vitamin D       levels are associated with insulin resistance in the pediatric population. The       present study provides additional evidence for the role of vitamin D in insulin       resistance. Our findings suggest the supplementation of vitamin D may be helpful       in preventing insulin resistance and subsequent diabetes.
AB  - BACKGROUND: We undertook this study to evaluate the results of surgical treatment       of symptomatic cholelithiasis through laparoscopic cholecystectomy in a series of       47 consecutive pediatric patients. METHODS: During a 5-year period (2001-2005) we       performed laparoscopic cholecystectomy in 47 patients <18 years old in one       institution by the same surgical team. The population was comprised of 41 girls       and 6 boys (age range: 6-18 years). All had symptomatic cholelithiasis confirmed       at ultrasound examination. Associated pathology was studied in each case. The       surgical procedure consisted of a four-port laparoscopic cholecystectomy under       CO(2) pneumoperitoneum. No other concomitant procedure was performed in any case.       RESULTS: Median age was 14.6 years old. The youngest patient of the series had a       hematological disease. In girls we identified obesity in 62.5% of patients, with       a body mass index (BMI) of 26.6 kg/m(2) (SD 3.0) vs. 21.5 kg/m(2) (SD 3.0) in       boys (p <0.05), 30% of the girls had a positive medical history for pregnancies       (range 1-3) and 15% regularly used oral contraceptives. All cases were       symptomatic and 13% suffered from acute biliary pancreatitis. Average surgical       time was 59.8 min, the conversion rate was 2.1% and the most frequent surgical       complication was gallbladder rupture. No major morbidity was observed as well as       no mortality. Postoperatively, all patients were asymptomatic, with a minimum       follow-up time of 6 months. CONCLUSIONS: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was highly       effective in cases of symptomatic cholelithiasis. Etiologically, females showed       risk factors for cholelithiasis similar to those usually observed in adults.       Probably in the near future the incidence of cholelithiasis will increase in this       age group. Pediatric surgeons should be familiarized with the minimal access       technique to treat this disease.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: The epidemiologic link between cesarean birth and childhood obesity is       unresolved, partly because most studies come from industrialized settings where       many post-birth factors affect the risk for obesity. We take advantage of an       unusual ethnographic situation where hospital and cesarean birth modes have       recently been introduced among Yucatec Maya subsistence farmers, but young       children have had minimal exposure to the nutritional transition. While we expect       to find very low rates of childhood obesity, we predict that cesarean-born       children will be larger and heavier than vaginally born children. METHODS: Weight       and height were collected monthly on 108 children aged 0-5 (3576 observations       total). Birth mode and birthweight were collected by maternal interview. Data       were analyzed using linear mixed models that compare child growth [Maya       population-specific Z-scores for weight-for-age and body mass index-for-age (WAZ       and BMIZ)] in cesarean and vaginally born children aged 0-5 years. RESULTS: The       cesarean rate was 20%, no children were obese, and 5% were overweight. Cesarean       birth was a significant predictor of child WAZ and BMIZ after accounting for       maternal effects, child birthweight, and sex. Children who were born by cesarean       to mothers with high BMI had the highest WAZ of all children by 5 years of age,       and the highest BMIZ of all children at all ages. CONCLUSION: Cesarean-born Maya       children had higher BMI than vaginally born children, even in the absence of many       known confounding factors that contribute to childhood obesity. Child growth was       most sensitive to birth mode when mothers had high BMI.
AB  - BACKGROUND: currently, there is an increase in the incidence of obesity in the       pediatric population, which is associated with an increase in metabolic syndrome       (MetS). Thus, an early diagnosis of MetS is needed in this population to improve       the prevention of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes in adulthood.       OBJECTIVE: the aim of this study was to explore the ability of health       professionals to identify the main criteria for MetS in children, which is       required for establishing the conditions for early diagnosis and timely       treatment. METHODS: a cross-sectional study was conducted using a survey and       conducted in two states of the republic (Aguascalientes and Hidalgo) and in the       Federal District from January to December 2014. RESULTS: the questionnaire was       applied to 274 health professionals. Most of these professionals (61.7%) reported       knowledge of the criteria for MetS diagnosis in children and adolescents.       Additionally, it was observed that 63.1% of professionals did not perform the       needed measurements the waist of circumference in preschool children and that       46.4% did not measure them in school children. However, 64.6% of professionals       performed the measurements in adolescents. CONCLUSIONS: this study found that       health professionals providing care to pediatric patients do not know the       parameters and cutoff points for MetS diagnosis. They do not conduct a deliberate       search for MetS risk factors, which is a major limitation for diagnosis and early       treatment. Therefore, we suggest a systematic approach for maintaining the       standards of health professionals and to make determining the criteria for proper       diagnosis of MetS a target of clinical practice.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Studies suggest a positive association between dietary energy density       (DED) and body weight in adults, but evidence in children is inconclusive.       OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to compare usual DED distributions of       nonoverweight vs. overweight or obese (OW/O) Mexican children. METHODS: The study       used 24-h recall (24HR) data from 2367 children aged 5-11 y from the 2012 Mexican       National Health and Nutrition Survey (ENSANUT 2012). Repeated 24HR measures were       obtained in a random sample (∼10%) to estimate usual intake distributions by       using the Iowa State University (PC-Side) method. Implausible dietary reports       were identified. Multivariate linear regression models were used to evaluate the       relation between DED and body mass index status and to compare results with and       without PC-Side adjustment and restriction to plausible reporters. RESULTS: A       total of 35.1% of the children in the sample were OW/O. The usual DED mean was       ∼175 kcal/100 g in both the complete sample and the plausible reporters       subsample. Regression models adjusted by PC-Side and for potential confounders       showed higher DED in OW/O relative to nonoverweight children for both plausible       reporters (9.7 kcal/100 g; n = 1452, P < 0.0001) and the complete sample (7.9       kcal/100 g; n = 2367, P < 0.0001). The DED difference in plausible reporters       translates into 88 additional kilocalories in daily energy intake of OW/O       children. In the absence of PC-side adjustment, the difference was significant       for plausible reporters (P < 0.05) but not for the complete sample (P > 0.10).       CONCLUSIONS: A positive association between usual DED and OW/O was found in       Mexican children. The association was stronger when only plausible reporters were       considered. This suggests that there is a need for strategies to reduce energy       density in the diet of Mexican children.
AB  - The global prevalence of obesity is rising rapidly, highlighting the importance       of understanding risk factors related to the condition. Childhood obesity, which       has itself become increasingly prevalent, is an important predictor of adulthood       obesity. Studies suggest that the protein content consumed in infanthood is an       important predictor of weight gain in childhood, which may contribute to higher       body mass index (BMI). For instance, there is evidence that a lower protein       infant formula (lpIF) for infants of overweight or obese mothers can offer       advantages over currently-used infant formulas with regard to preventing       excessive weight gain. The current study used health economic modelling to       predict the long-term clinical and economic outcomes in Mexico associated with       lpIF compared to a currently-used formula. A discrete event simulation was       constructed to extrapolate the outcomes of trials on the use of formula in       infanthood to changes in lifetime BMI, the health outcomes due to the changes in       BMI and the healthcare system costs, productivity and quality of life impact       associated with these outcomes. The model predicts that individuals who receive       lpIF in infancy go on to have lower BMI levels throughout their lives, are less       likely to be obese or develop obesity-related disease, live longer, incur fewer       health system costs and have improved productivity. Simulation-based economic       modelling suggests that the benefits seen in the short term, with the use of lpIF       over a currently-used formula, could translate into considerable health and       economic benefits in the long term. Modelling over such long timeframes is       inevitably subject to uncertainty. Further research should be undertaken to       improve the certainty of the model.
AB  - There is evidence linking intrauterine growth retardation with increased       cardiovascular risk and diabetes mellitus (DM) later in life. However, little is       known about the association between malnutrition during the first year of life       and metabolic abnormalities in adulthood. The objective of this study was to       assess the effect of documented malnutrition during the first year of life on       glucose tolerance, plasma insulin, lipid profile, and blood pressure in early       adulthood, as well as to assess the interaction between body mass index (BMI) and       malnutrition on these variables. A study group of young men with a documented       history of malnutrition during their first year of life was recruited from 4       pediatric hospitals in Mexico City and compared with a control group. Subjects       included were 52 men, aged 20.2 +/- 3.6 years, with a mean birth weight of 3.0       +/- 0.7 kg and documented malnutrition in their first year of life; controls were       50 men, aged 23.3 +/- 1.8 years, with a mean birth weight of 3.2 +/- 0.5 kg.       Insulin and glucose concentrations, fasting and in response to an oral glucose       load, plasma lipids, blood pressure, and an insulin sensitivity index (ISI) were       measured. The areas under the curves of glucose (AUCG) and insulin (AUCI) were       significantly higher in cases (P =.012 and <.002, respectively), independent of       birth weight, BMI, or age. BMI was significantly associated with fasting plasma       insulin (FPI), AUCI, ISI, triglyceride, and high-density lipoprotein       (HDL)-cholesterol concentrations in cases, but not in controls. These data       suggest that early malnutrition in extrauterine life, independently of birth       weight, has an adverse effect on insulin metabolism and glucose tolerance in       young men, and it worsens as body mass increases even within the normal range of       BMI. Therefore, it is advisable to prevent obesity in individuals exposed to       early malnutrition.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: The accumulation of abdominal fat is associated with cardiometabolic       abnormalities. Waist circumference (WC) measurements allow an indirect evaluation       of abdominal adiposity. However, controversy exists over which WC reference       values are the most suitable for identifying the pediatric population at risk.       The aim of the study was to evaluate the ability of various WC indices to       identify abdominal obesity as diagnostic tools for predicting cardiometabolic       risk in Mexican children and adolescents. METHODS: Anthropometric measurements       were performed and biochemical profiles determined in a crosssectional study that       included 366 children and adolescents. Four parameters were used to evaluate       abdominal obesity in our study group: (1) WC >90th percentile, according to the       Fernández reference in a Mexican-American population measured by the National       Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) technique; (2) WC >90th percentile, according       to the Klünder reference in a Mexican population (measured by the World Health       Organization [WHO] technique); (3) waist-to-height ratio (WHtR) >0.5 according to       WHO; and (4) WHtR >0.5 according to NCHS. The ability of each of the indices to       discriminate cardiometabolic abnormalities (fasting plasma glucose, dyslipidemia,       and hypertension) was assessed. RESULTS: WHtR >0.5 according to WHO or NCHS       references showed greater sensitivity to detect metabolic abnormalities compared       to percentile reference parameters (74.3 to 100% vs. 59.0 to 88.9%; P<.05).       However, the percentiles displayed more specificity to identify these alterations       (46.2 to 62.2 vs. 21.3 to 46.9; P<.05). Area under the curve analysis showed that       WHtR >0.5 can more readily detect hypertriglyceridemia (0.642),       hypoalphalipoproteinemia (0.700), and a combination of two or more metabolic       abnormalities (0.661), whereas WC >90th percentile, according to Klünder, better       detected hyperglycemia (0.555). CONCLUSION: WHtR >0.5 is a sensitive measure to       identify pediatric patients with cardiometabolic alterations, despite its low       specificity, and is a useful diagnostic tool to detect populations at risk. Based       on the results of this study, we recommend preferential use of the Klünder waist       circumference references over the Fernández method in Mexican pediatric       populations. ABBREVIATIONS: AUC = area under the curve BMI = body mass index HDL       = high-density lipoprotein IDF = International Diabetes Federation LDL =       low-density lipoprotein MS = metabolic syndrome NCHS = National Center for Health       Statistics ROC = receiver operating characteristic WC = waist circumference WHO =       World Health Organization WHtR = waist-to-height ratio.
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To estimate the prevalence of Metabolic Syndrome (MS), its components       and its association with obesity and cardiovascular risk in school age children.       MATERIALS AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study of 1,017 children from 6 to 12       years of age. Anthropometric information, blood pressure, glucose, insulin,       cholesterol, HDLc, LDLc and triglycerides were collected. The presence of MS and       its components were determined by criteria of Cook et. al. (2003), modified for       children and adolescents. In the analysis, the children were grouped by aged       group of 6 to 9 and 10 to 12 years. The association between MS, obesity and       cardiovascular risk was estimated using Student's t-test and Mann-Whitney U test,       Chi-square test and logistic regression. RESULTS: The MS was present with 54.6%       in obese children. Obesity was the characteristic of greater association to       suffer from MS with an OR=8.62 p<0.001. CONCLUSIONS: MS is high among children       with obesity, and is mostly associated with insulin resistance and atherogenic       risk.
AB  - AIM: To identify risk factors other than energy intake or expenditure that can       predict adiposity and overweight in children from a region with high prevalence       of obesity. METHODS: We studied 551 children aged 6-12 years (50.5% girls) from a       city in the North of Mexico. Tetrapolar bioimpedance was used to assess body fat       content. Overweight was estimated by analysis of age- and gender-standardized       body mass index (BMI) relative to reference data of the International Obesity       Task Force (BMIs that predict obesity in adulthood). Multivariate analyses were       modeled to find independent predictors of adiposity. RESULTS: The frequency of       overweight/obesity was 37.6%. There were no differences between genders with       respect to weight, height and BMI; however, age-standardized percentage of body       fat and a sedentary lifestyle were higher in girls than in boys (p < 0.001).       Independent predictors of overweight/obesity were having first-degree relatives       with obesity [adjusted odds ratio (OR) 2.26, 95% confidence interval (CI)       1.40-3.64], sedentary lifestyle (OR 1.58, 95% CI 1.05-2.37) and being the third       child or younger in offspring (OR 1.59, 95% CI 1.02-2.47). Predictors of body fat       in the highest quartile of the sample were having first-degree relatives with       obesity (OR 2.59, 95% CI 1.41-4.74), female gender (OR 5.60, 95% CI 3.22-9.77)       and being the third child or younger in offspring (OR 2.07, 95% CI 1.22-3.51).       These effects could not be explained by social class, ethnicity, maternal age and       duration of breastfeeding. CONCLUSIONS: Risk factors easily identified by       history-taking can predict childhood adiposity and the high risk of obesity in       adulthood. Having a first-degree relative with obesity underscores the impact of       genes and the family lifestyle on excessive adiposity. Being the third child or       younger may denote different nurture practices in offspring; however, this factor       deserves more exploration.
AB  - Background Gestational weight gain (GWG) influences both fetal and maternal       health. Leptin is a biomarker that may predict the early development of obesity       and greater weight gain in childhood. Newborns with higher neonatal weight have       been found to have higher leptin levels in umbilical cord blood (UCB). There are       few studies that evaluate leptin levels in UCB according to GWG in women with a       normal body mass index (BMI). The aim of the present study was to determine       whether the levels of leptin in UCB in neonates born to mothers with a high GWG       were higher, compared with levels in newborns whose mothers had a low GWG.       Methods A cross-sectional analytic study was conducted on 65 primigravidas. They       were under 30 years of age, had normal pregestational BMIs, no associated       diseases and were classified as having high (n = 22) or low (n = 43) GWG. The       neonatal UCB leptin levels were measured and both neonatal and maternal       anthropometric evaluations were carried out. The quantitative variables were       compared through the Mann-Whitney U test and Student's t test, as appropriate.       Results UCB leptin levels were higher in the neonates whose mothers were in the       high GWG group, compared with those born to mothers in the low GWG group (7.0       [1.9-11.4] vs. 2.9 [1.2-6.7] ng/mL, p = 0.020). When stratified by sex, that       difference was maintained only in male neonates. Conclusions UCB leptin levels       were higher in neonates born to mothers with a high GWG, compared with those in       newborns whose mothers had a low GWG.
AB  - PURPOSE: To describe the physical and metabolic characteristics of children       diagnosed with fatty liver disease in a gastroenterology clinic in El Paso,       Texas. DATA SOURCES: A retrospective chart review of 31 patients aged 8-18       diagnosed with fatty liver was conducted. CONCLUSIONS: These children were       diagnosed with fatty liver by elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels       (mean ALT levels 126 +/- 08 U/L) and increased hepatic echogenicity measured via       ultrasound. The majority of children were adolescents (12-17 years of age) and       Mexican American. All subjects were overweight (body mass index [BMI] > or = 95th       percentile) based on Centers for Disease Control and Prevention standards. In a       subset of children for whom results from laboratory test were available, we found       40% had high triglycerides (> or = 150 mg/dL), 53% had low high-density       lipoprotein cholesterol (< or = 35 mg/dL), and 17% had prediabetes (fasting       glucose > or = 100 mg/dL). The clinical and laboratory findings in this patient       population with fatty liver are consistent with a diagnosis of nonalcoholic fatty       liver disease (NAFLD). IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Despite the increasing trend in       overweight among children and adolescents, data suggest low rates of diagnosis       and management of overweight and related comorbidities by healthcare providers.       Overweight has been associated with fatty liver disease in the pediatric       population and includes other comorbidities such insulin resistance and features       of metabolic syndrome. Screening for overweight in children should constitute the       first step in identifying children at risk for NAFLD. Nurse practitioners should       include in the evaluation of pediatric patients calculation of BMI and waist       circumference for age and screening for other overweight-related comorbidities.
AB  - The effect of altitude of residence on the growth status of 11,454 indigenous       school children 6-14 years of age in Oaxaca, southern Mexico, was examined.       Indicators of living conditions (human development index [HDI], index of       community nutritional risk [INR], index of marginalization [IM], index of       relative isolation [II]) were regressed on z-scores for height, weight and BMI,       and the residuals were regressed on altitude of residence (km). Independent of       other environmental conditions, altitude negatively affected height by       approximately -0.07 z-scores per kilometer altitude above sea level. The       estimated average decrease in stature was 0.92 cm per kilometer elevation. BMI       was significantly increased, 1.2 units per kilometer elevation, consistent with       earlier studies of growth status and altitude. In contrast, weight was not       affected by altitude of residence. Approximately 36% of the reduction in height       and 54% of the increase in BMI were due to altitude effects; the remaining       changes in height and BMI were associated with environmental factors reflected in       the indices of community well-being considered.
AB  - The epidemic of childhood obesity, the risk of developing left ventricular       hypertrophy, and evidence of the early development of atherosclerosis in children       would make the detection of and intervention in childhood hypertension important       to reduce long-term health risks; however, supporting data are lacking. Secondary       hypertension is more common in preadolescent children, with most cases caused by       renal disease. Primary or essential hypertension is more common in adolescents       and has multiple risk factors, including obesity and a family history of       hypertension. Evaluation involves a through history and physical examination,       laboratory tests, and specialized studies. Management is multifaceted.       Nonpharmacologic treatments include weight reduction, exercise, and dietary       modifications. Although the evidence of first line therapy for hypertension is       still controversial, the recommendations for pharmacologic treatment are based on       symptomatic hypertension, evidence of end-organ damage, stage 2 of hypertension,       or stage 1 of hypertension unresponsive to lifestyle modifications, and       hypertension with diabetes mellitus.
AB  - The aim of this study was to evaluate the ability of parents to estimate the       weight status of preschool children attending the Instituto Mexicano del Seguro       Social (IMSS) day-care centers using three different tools. A total of 100       parent-child pairs attending to all the existing IMSS day-care centers in       Ensenada (n = 9) completed a questionnaire on the perception of children's weight       status using verbal description, sketches, and pictures. Chi squared test and       univariate logistic regression was applied to assess the difference in perception       between the tools used, the factors associated with the weight status perception       and to identify predictors of parental underestimation of their child's weight.       The sample size was estimated for a significance level of 0.05 with statistical       power of 80%. No significant differences were found in the perception of weight       status using different tools. The parents' underestimation of the child's weight       status ranged from 51 to 59%, this percentage jumps to 79 to 84% in overweight       children and 82 to 91% in obese children. Being a young mother and having a       daughter increased the risk of underestimation. Higher odds of underestimation       were found in > 2BMI z-score. The high underestimation found in this study shows       that the ability of parents in signaling an alert to prevent childhood obesity       might be highly reduced and preventive health programs should include increasing       the weight status perception.
AB  - Background: The present study aimed to determine the association of the       triglyceride/high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (TG/HDL-C) index with IR in       pediatric patients with overweight (OW) and OB, to assess the ability of the       TG/HDL-C index to predict IR, and to estimate the prevalence of IR and metabolic       syndrome (MetS). Methods: A cross-sectional study comprised 628 Mexican children       (2-16 years old) from the OB clinic. IR was estimated using the HOMA-IR index       (‡2.5). The modified Adult Treatment Panel III criteria were used to define MetS.       Correlation analyses and a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve were       used to assess the association of the TG/HDL-C index with IR and to establish the       best cutoff for the TG/HDL-C index. Results: About 79.3% of the children       presented IR and 55.4% MetS. Common findings in patients with IR were acanthosis       nigricans (94.8%) and a TG/HDL-C index ‡2.27 (70.5%). Considering all the       patients with a high TG/HDL-C index, 78.4% presented MetS, and 88.0% IR. The area       under the curve-ROC for the ability of the TG/HDL-C index to predict IR was 0.72       (P < 0.001), with a sensitivity of 70.5% and specificity of 63.1%. Conclusions:       TG/HDL-C index is a feasible alternative to the HOMA-IR index to predict IR in       Mexican children with OW or OB. It might be used to identify children with the       greatest need for treatment interventions.
AB  - This supplement of the Revista Médica del Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social       includes 10 original contributions, and also six current themes, all of them       related to childhood obesity. It is the result of an institutional program that       it has been identified as Redes de Investigación Institucional, and it has been       promoted and developed by the Coordinación de Investigación of the Instituto       Mexicano del Seguro Social.
